{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deflang2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 CourierNewPSMT;}}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.21.2510;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\lang9\f0\fs20 _Chapter 1_\par
Minas Tirith\par
Pippin looked out from the shelter of Gandalf's cloak. He wondered if he\par
was awake or still sleeping, still in the swift-moving dream in which he had\par
been wrapped so long since the great ride began. The dark world was rushing by\par
and the wind sang loudly in his ears. He could see nothing but the wheeling\par
stars, and away to his right vast shadows against the sky where the mountains\par
of the South marched past. Sleepily he tried to reckon the times and stages of\par
their journey, but his memory was drowsy and uncertain.\par
There had been the first ride at terrible speed without a halt, and then\par
in the dawn he had seen a pale gleam of gold, and they had come to the silent\par
town and the great empty house on the hill. And hardly had they reached its\par
shelter when the winged shadow had passed over once again, and men wilted with\par
fear. But Gandalf had spoken soft words to him, and he had slept in a corner,\par
tired but uneasy, dimly aware of comings and goings and of men talking and\par
Gandalf giving orders. And then again riding, riding in the night. This was\par
the second, no, the third night since he had looked in the Stone. And with\par
that hideous memory he woke fully, and shivered, and the noise of the wind\par
became filled with menacing voices.\par
A light kindled in the sky, a blaze of yellow fire behind dark barriers\par
Pippin cowered back, afraid for a moment, wondering into what dreadful country\par
Gandalf was bearing him. He rubbed his eyes, and then he saw that it was the\par
moon rising above the eastern shadows, now almost at the full. So the night\par
was not yet old and for hours the dark journey would go on. He stirred and\par
spoke.\par
'Where are we, Gandalf?' he asked.\par
'In the realm of Gondor,' the wizard answered. 'The land of An\'f3rien is\par
still passing by.'\par
There was a silence again for a while. Then, 'What is that?' cried Pippin\par
suddenly, clutching at Gandalf's cloak. 'Look! Fire, red fire! Are there\par
dragons in this land? Look, there is another!'\par
For answer Gandalf cried aloud to his horse. 'On, Shadowfax! We must\par
hasten. Time is short. See! The beacons of Gondor are alight, calling for aid.\par
War is kindled. See, there is the fire on Amon D\'een, and flame on Eilenach; and\par
there they go speeding west: Nardol, Erelas, Min-Rimmon, Calenhad, and the\par
Halifirien on the borders of Rohan.'\par
But Shadowfax paused in his stride, slowing to a walk, and then he lifted\par
up his head and neighed. And out of the darkness the answering neigh of other\par
horses came; and presently the thudding of hoofs was heard, and three riders\par
swept up and passed like flying ghosts in the moon and vanished into the West.\par
Then Shadowfax gathered himself together and sprang away, and the night flowed\par
over him like a roaring wind.\par
Pippin became drowsy again and paid little attention to Gandalf telling\par
him of the customs of Gondor, and how the Lord of the City had beacons built\par
on the tops of outlying hills along both borders of the great range, and\par
maintained posts at these points where fresh horses were always in readiness\par
to bear his errand-riders to Rohan in the North, or to Belfalas in the South.\par
'It is long since the beacons of the North were lit,' he said; 'and in the\par
ancient days of Gondor they were not needed, for they had the Seven Stones.'\par
Pippin stirred uneasily.\par
'Sleep again, and do not be afraid!' said Gandalf. 'For you are not going\par
like Frodo to Mordor, but to Minas Tirith, and there you will be as safe as\par
you can be anywhere in these days. If Gondor falls, or the Ring is taken, then\par
the Shire will be no refuge.'\par
'You do not comfort me,' said Pippin, but nonetheless sleep crept over\par
him. The last thing that he remembered before he fell into deep dream was a\par
glimpse of high white peaks, glimmering like floating isles above the clouds\par
as they caught the light of the westering moon. He wondered where Frodo was,\par
and if he was already in Mordor, or if he was dead; and he did not know that\par
Frodo from far away looked on that same moon as it set beyond Gondor ere the\par
coming of the day.\par
Pippin woke to the sound of voices. Another day of hiding and a night of\par
journey had fleeted by. It was twilight: the cold dawn was at hand again, and\par
chill grey mists were about them. Shadowfax stood steaming with sweat, but he\par
held his neck proudly and showed no sign of weariness. Many tall men heavily\par
cloaked stood beside him, and behind them in the mist loomed a wall of stone.\par
Partly ruinous it seemed, but already before the night was passed the sound of\par
hurried labour could be heard: beat of hammers, clink of trowels, and the\par
creak of wheels. Torches and flares glowed dully here and there in the fog.\par
Gandalf was speaking to the men that barred his way, and as he listened Pippin\par
became aware that he himself was being discussed.\par
'Yea truly, we know you, Mithrandir,' said the leader of the men, 'and\par
you know the pass-words of the Seven Gates and are free to go forward. But we\par
do not know your companion. What is he? A dwarf out of the mountains in the\par
North? We wish for no strangers in the land at this time, unless they be\par
mighty men of arms in whose faith and help we can trust.'\par
'I will vouch for him before the seat of Denethor,' said Gandalf. 'And as\par
for valour, that cannot be computed by stature. He has passed through more\par
battles and perils than you have, Ingold, though you be twice his height; and\par
he comes now from the storming of Isengard, of which we bear tidings, and\par
great weariness is on him, or I would wake him. His name is Peregrin, a very\par
valiant man.'\par
'Man?' said Ingold dubiously; and the others laughed.\par
'Man!' cried Pippin, now thoroughly roused. 'Man! Indeed not! I am a\par
hobbit and no more valiant than I am a man, save perhaps now and again by\par
necessity. Do not let Gandalf deceive you!'\par
'Many a doer of great deeds might say no more,' said Ingold. 'But what is\par
a hobbit?'\par
'A Halfling,' answered Gandalf. 'Nay, not the one that was spoken of,' he\par
added seeing the wonder in the men's faces. 'Not he, yet one of his kindred.'\par
'Yes, and one who journeyed with him,' said Pippin. 'And Boromir of your\par
City was with us, and he saved me in the snows of the North, and at the last\par
he was slain defending me from many foes.'\par
'Peace!' said Gandalf. 'The news of that grief should have been told\par
first to the father.'\par
'It has been guessed already,' said Ingold; 'for there have been strange\par
portents here of late. But pass on now quickly! For the Lord of Minas Tirith\par
will be eager to see any that bear the latest tidings of his son, be he man\par
or-'\par
'Hobbit,' said Pippin. 'Little service can I offer to your lord, but what\par
I can do, I would do, remembering Boromir the brave.'\par
'Fare you well!' said Ingold; and the men made way for Shadow fax, and he\par
passed through a narrow gate in the wall. 'May you bring good counsel to\par
Denethor in his need, and to us all, Mithrandir!' Ingold cried. 'But you come\par
with tidings of grief and danger, as is your wont, they say.'\par
'Because I come seldom but when my help is needed,' answered Gandalf.\par
'And as for counsel, to you I would say that you are over-late in repairing\par
the wall of the Pelennor. Courage will now be your best defence against the\par
storm that is at hand \endash  that and such hope as I bring. For not all the tidings\par
that I bring are evil. But leave your trowels and sharpen your swords!'\par
'The work will be finished ere evening,' said Ingold. 'This is the last\par
portion of the wall to be put in defence: the least open to attack, for it\par
looks towards our friends of Rohan. Do you know aught of them? Will they\par
answer the summons, think you?'\par
'Yes, they will come. But they have fought many battles at your back.\par
This road and no road looks towards safety any longer. Be vigilant! But for\par
Gandalf Stormcrow you would have seen a host of foes coming out of An\'f3rien and\par
no Riders of Rohan. And you may yet. Fare you well, and sleep not!'\par
Gandalf passed now into the wide land beyond the Rammas Echor. So the men\par
of Gondor called the out wall that they had built with great labour, after\par
Ithilien fell under the shadow of their Enemy. For ten leagues or more it ran\par
from the mountains' feet and so back again, enclosing in its fence the fields\par
of the Pelennor: fair and fertile townlands on the long slopes and terraces\par
falling to the deep levels of the Anduin. At its furthest point from the Great\par
Gate of the City, north-eastward, the wall was four leagues distant, and there\par
from a frowning bank it overlooked the long flats beside the river, and men\par
had made it high and strong; for at that point, upon a walled causeway, the\par
road came in from the fords and bridges of Osgiliath and passed through a\par
guarded gate between embattled towers. At its nearest point the wall was\par
little more than one league from the City, and that was south-eastward. There\par
Anduin, going in a wide knee about the hills of Emyn Arnen in South Ithilien,\par
bent sharply west, and the out-wall rose upon its very brink; and beneath it\par
lay the quays and landings of the Harlond for craft that came upstream from\par
the southern fiefs.\par
The townlands were rich, with wide tilth and many orchards, and\par
homesteads there were with oast and garner, fold and byre, and many rills\par
rippling through the green from the highlands down to Anduin. Yet the herdsmen\par
and husbandmen that dwelt there were not many, and the most part of the people\par
of Gondor lived in the seven circles of the City, or in the high vales of the\par
mountain-borders, in Lossarnach, or further south in fair Lebennin with its\par
five swift streams. There dwelt a hardy folk between the mountains and the\par
sea. They were reckoned men of Gondor, yet their blood was mingled, and there\par
were short and swarthy folk among them whose sires came more from the\par
forgotten men who housed in the shadow of the hills in the Dark Years ere the\par
coming of the kings. But beyond, in the great fief of Belfalas, dwelt Prince\par
Imrahil in his castle of Dol Amroth by the sea, and he was of high blood, and\par
his folk also, tall men and proud with sea-grey eyes.\par
Now after Gandalf had ridden for some time the light of day grew in the\par
sky, and Pippin roused himself and looked up. To his left lay a sea of mist,\par
rising to a bleak shadow in the East; but to his right great mountains reared\par
their heads, ranging from the West to a steep and sudden end, as if in the\par
making of the land the River had burst through a great barrier, carving out a\par
mighty valley to be a land of battle and debate in times to come. And there\par
where the White Mountains of Ered Nimrais came to their end he saw, as Gandalf\par
had promised, the dark mass of Mount Mindolluin, the deep purple shadows of\par
its high glens, and its tall face whitening in the rising day. And upon its\par
out-thrust knee was the Guarded City, with its seven walls of stone so strong\par
and old that it seemed to have been not builded but carven by giants out of\par
the bones of the earth.\par
Even as Pippin gazed in wonder the walls passed from looming grey to\par
white, blushing faintly in the dawn; and suddenly the sun climbed over the\par
eastern shadow and sent forth a shaft that smote the face of the City. Then\par
Pippin cried aloud, for the Tower of Ecthelion, standing high within the\par
topmost walls' shone out against the sky, glimmering like a spike of pearl and\par
silver, tall and fair and shapely, and its pinnacle glittered as if it were\par
wrought of crystals; and white banners broke and fluttered from the\par
battlements in the morning breeze' and high and far he heard a clear ringing\par
as of silver trumpets.\par
So Gandalf and Peregrin rode to the Great Gate of the Men of Gondor at\par
the rising of the sun, and its iron doors rolled back before them.\par
'Mithrandir! Mithrandir!' men cried. 'Now we know that the storm is\par
indeed nigh!'\par
'It is upon you,' said Gandalf. 'I have ridden on its wings. Let me pass!\par
I must come to your Lord Denethor, while his stewardship lasts. Whatever\par
betide, you have come to the end of the Gondor that you have known. Let me\par
pass!'\par
Then men fell back before the command of his voice and questioned him no\par
further, though they gazed in wonder at the hobbit that sat before him and at\par
the horse that bore him. For the people of the City used horses very little\par
and they were seldom seen in their streets, save only those ridden by the\par
errand-riders of their lord. And they said: 'Surely that is one of the great\par
steeds of the King of Rohan? Maybe the Rohirrim will come soon to strengthen\par
us.' But Shadowfax walked proudly up the long winding road.\par
For the fashion of Minas Tirith was such that it was built on seven\par
levels, each delved into the hill, and about each was set a wall, and in each\par
wall was a gate. But the gates were not set in a line: the Great Gate in the\par
City Wall was at the east point of the circuit, but the next faced half south,\par
and the third half north, and so to and fro upwards; so that the paved way\par
that climbed towards the Citadel turned first this way and then that across\par
the face of the hill. And each time that it passed the line of the Great Gate\par
it went through an arched tunnel, piercing a vast pier of rock whose huge outthrust\par
bulk divided in two all the circles of the City save the first. For\par
partly in the primeval shaping of the hill, partly by the mighty craft and\par
labour of old, there stood up from the rear of the wide court behind the Gate\par
a towering bastion of stone, its edge sharp as a ship-keel facing east. Up it\par
rose, even to the level of the topmost circle, and there was crowned by a\par
battlement; so that those in the Citadel might, like mariners in a mountainous\par
ship, look from its peak sheer down upon the Gate seven hundred feet below.\par
The entrance to the Citadel also looked eastward, but was delved in the heart\par
of the rock; thence a long lamp-lit slope ran up to the seventh gate. Thus men\par
reached at last the High Court, and the Place of the Fountain before the feet\par
of the White Tower: tall and shapely, fifty fathoms from its base to the\par
pinnacle, where the banner of the Stewards floated a thousand feet above the\par
plain.\par
A strong citadel it was indeed, and not to be taken by a host of enemies,\par
if there were any within that could hold weapons; unless some foe could come\par
behind and scale the lower skirts of Mindolluin, and so come upon the narrow\par
shoulder that joined the Hill of Guard to the mountain mass. But that\par
shoulder, which rose to the height of the fifth wall, was hedged with great\par
ramparts right up to the precipice that overhung its western end; and in that\par
space stood the houses and domed tombs of bygone kings and lords, for ever\par
silent between the mountain and the tower.\par
Pippin gazed in growing wonder at the great stone city, vaster and more\par
splendid than anything that he had dreamed of; greater and stronger than\par
Isengard, and far more beautiful. Yet it was in truth falling year by year\par
into decay; and already it lacked half the men that could have dwelt at ease\par
there. In every street they passed some great house or court over whose doors\par
and arched gates were carved many fair letters of strange and ancient shapes:\par
names Pippin guessed of great men and kindreds that had once dwelt there; and\par
yet now they were silent, and no footsteps rang on their wide pavements, nor\par
voice was heard in their halls, nor any face looked out from door or empty\par
window.\par
At last they came out of shadow to the seventh gate, and the warm sun\par
that shone down beyond the river, as Frodo walked in the glades of Ithilien,\par
glowed here on the smooth walls and rooted pillars, and the great arch with\par
keystone carven in the likeness of a crowned and kingly head. Gandalf\par
dismounted, for no horse was allowed in the Citadel, and Shadowfax suffered\par
himself to be led away at the soft word of his master.\par
The Guards of the gate were robed in black, and their helms were of\par
strange shape, high-crowned, with long cheek-guards close-fitting to the face,\par
and above the cheek-guards were set the white wings of sea-birds; but the\par
helms gleamed with a flame of silver, for they were indeed wrought of\par
_mithril_, heirlooms from the glory of old days. Upon the black surcoats were\par
embroidered in white a tree blossoming like snow beneath a silver crown and\par
many-pointed stars. This was the livery of the heirs of Elendil, and none wore\par
it now in all Gondor, save the Guards of the Citadel before the Court of the\par
Fountain where the White Tree once had grown.\par
Already it seemed that word of their coming had gone before them: and at\par
once they were admitted, silently, and without question. Quickly Gandalf\par
strode across the white-paved court. A sweet fountain played there in the\par
morning sun, and a sward of bright green lay about it; but in the midst.\par
drooping over the pool, stood a dead tree, and the falling drops dripped sadly\par
from its barren and broken branches back into the clear water.\par
Pippin glanced at it as he hurried after Gandalf. It looked mournful, he\par
thought, and he wondered why the dead tree was left in this place where\par
everything else was well tended.\par
_Seven stars and seven stones and one white tree._\par
The words that Gandalf had murmured came back into his mind. And then he\par
found himself at the doors of the great hall beneath the gleaming tower; and\par
behind the wizard he passed the tall silent door-wardens and entered the cool\par
echoing shadows of the house of stone.\par
They walked down a paved passage, long and empty, and as they went\par
Gandalf spoke softly to Pippin. 'Be careful of your words, Master Peregrin!\par
This is no time for hobbit pertness. Th\'e9oden is a kindly old man. Denethor is\par
of another sort, proud and subtle, a man of far greater lineage and power,\par
though he is not called a king. But he will speak most to you, and question\par
you much, since you can tell him of his son Boromir. He loved him greatly: too\par
much perhaps; and the more so because they were unlike. But under cover of\par
this love he will think it easier to learn what he witches from you rather\par
than from me. Do not tell him more than you need, and leave quiet the matter\par
of Frodo's errand. I will deal with that in due time. And say nothing about\par
Aragorn either, unless you must.'\par
'Why not? What is wrong with Strider?' Pippin whispered. 'He meant to\par
come here, didn't he? And he'll be arriving soon himself anyway.'\par
'Maybe, maybe,' said Gandalf. 'Though if he comes, it is likely to be in\par
some way that no one expects, not even Denethor. It will be better so. At\par
least he should come unheralded by us.'\par
Gandalf halted before a tall door of polished metal. 'See, Master Pippin,\par
there is no time to instruct you now in the history of Gondor; though it might\par
have been better, if you had learned something of it, when you were still\par
birds-nesting and playing truant in the woods of the Shire. Do as I bid! It is\par
scarcely wise when bringing the news of the death of his heir to a mighty lord\par
to speak over much of the coming of one who will, if he comes, claim the\par
kingship. Is that enough?'\par
'Kingship?' said Pippin amazed.\par
'Yes,' said Gandalf. 'If you have walked all these days with closed ears\par
and mind asleep, wake up now!' He knocked on the door.\par
The door opened, but no one could be seen to open it. Pippin looked into\par
a great hall. It was lit by deep windows in the wide aisles at either side,\par
beyond the rows of tall pillars that upheld the roof. Monoliths of black\par
marble, they rose to great capitals carved in many strange figures of beasts\par
and leaves; and far above in shadow the wide vaulting gleamed with dull gold,\par
inset with flowing traceries of many colours. No hangings nor storied webs,\par
nor any things of woven stuff or of wood, were to be seen in that long solemn\par
hall; but between the pillars there stood a silent company of tall images\par
graven in cold stone.\par
Suddenly Pippin was reminded of the hewn rocks of Argonath, and awe fell\par
on him, as he looked down that avenue of kings long dead. At the far end upon\par
a dais of many steps was set a high throne under a canopy of marble shaped\par
like a crowned helm; behind it was carved upon the wall and set with gems an\par
image of a tree in flower. But the throne was empty. At the foot of the dais,\par
upon the lowest step which was broad and deep, there was a stone chair, black\par
and unadorned, and on it sat an old man gazing at his lap. In his hand was a\par
white rod with a golden knob. He did not look up. Solemnly they paced the long\par
floor towards him, until they stood three paces from his footstool. Then\par
Gandalf spoke.\par
'Hail, Lord and Steward of Minas Tirith, Denethor son of Ecthelion! I am\par
come with counsel and tidings in this dark hour.'\par
Then the old man looked up. Pippin saw his carven face with its proud\par
bones and skin like ivory, and the long curved nose between the dark deep\par
eyes; and he was reminded not so much of Boromir as of Aragorn. 'Dark indeed\par
is the hour,' said the old man, 'and at such times you are wont to come,\par
Mithrandir. But though all the signs forebode that the doom of Gondor is\par
drawing nigh, less now to me is that darkness than my own darkness. It has\par
been told to me that you bring with you one who saw my son die. Is this he?'\par
'It is,' said Gandalf. 'One of the twain. The other is with Th\'e9oden of\par
Rohan and may come hereafter. Halflings they are, as you see, yet this is not\par
he of whom the omens spoke.'\par
'Yet a Halfling still,' said Denethor grimly, 'and little love do I bear\par
the name, since those accursed words came to trouble our counsels and drew\par
away my son on the wild errand to his death. My Boromir! Now we have need of\par
you. Faramir should have gone in his stead.'\par
'He would have gone,' said Gandalf. 'Be not unjust in your grief! Boromir\par
claimed the errand and would not suffer any other to have it. He was a\par
masterful man, and one to take what he desired. I journeyed far with him and\par
learned much of his mood. But you speak of his death. You have had news of\par
that ere we came?'\par
'I have received this,' said Denethor, and laying down his rod he lifted\par
from his lap the thing that he had been gazing at. In each hand he held up one\par
half of a great horn cloven through the middle: a wild-ox horn bound with\par
silver.\par
'That is the horn that Boromir always wore!' cried Pippin.\par
'Verily,' said Denethor. 'And in my turn I bore it, and so did each\par
eldest son of our house, far back into the vanished years before the failing\par
of the kings, since Vorondil father of Mardil hunted the wild kine of Araw in\par
the far fields of Rh\'fbn. I heard it blowing dim upon the northern marches\par
thirteen days ago, and the River brought it to me, broken: it will wind no\par
more.' He paused and there was a heavy silence. Suddenly he turned his black\par
glance upon Pippin. 'What say you to that, Halfling?'\par
'Thirteen, thirteen days,' faltered Pippin. 'Yes, I think that would be\par
so. Yes, I stood beside him, as he blew the horn. But no help came. Only more\par
orcs.'\par
'So,' said Denethor, looking keenly at Pippin's face. 'You were there?\par
Tell me more! Why did no help come? And how did you escape, and yet he did\par
not, so mighty a man as he was, and only orcs to withstand him?'\par
Pippin flushed and forgot his fear. 'The mightiest man may be slain by\par
one arrow,' he said; 'and Boromir was pierced by many. When last I saw him he\par
sank beside a tree and plucked a black-feathered shaft from his side. Then I\par
swooned and was made captive. I saw him no more, and know no more. But I\par
honour his memory, for he was very valiant. He died to save us, my kinsman\par
Meriadoc and myself, waylaid in the woods by the soldiery of the Dark Lord;\par
and though he fell and failed, my gratitude is none the less.'\par
Then Pippin looked the old man in the eye, for pride stirred strangely\par
within him, still stung by the scorn and suspicion in that cold voice. 'Little\par
service, no doubt, will so great a lord of Men think to find in a hobbit, a\par
halfling from the northern Shire; yet such as it is, I will offer it, in\par
payment of my debt.' Twitching aside his grey cloak, Pippin drew forth his\par
small sword and laid it at Denethor's feet.\par
A pale smile, like a gleam of cold sun on a winter's evening, passed over\par
the old man's face; but he bent his head and held out his hand, laying the\par
shards of the horn aside. 'Give me the weapon!' he said.\par
Pippin lifted it and presented the hilt to him. 'Whence came this?' said\par
Denethor. 'Many, many years lie on it. Surely this is a blade wrought by our\par
own kindred in the North in the deep past?'\par
'It came out of the mounds that lie on the borders of my country ' said\par
Pippin. 'But only evil wights dwell there now, and I will not willingly tell\par
more of them.'\par
'I see that strange tales are woven about you,' said Denethor, 'and once\par
again it is shown that looks may belie the man \endash  or the halfling. I accept\par
your service. For you are not daunted by words; and you have courteous speech,\par
strange though the sound of it may be to us in the South. And we shall have\par
need of all folk of courtesy, be they great or small, in the days to come.\par
Swear to me now!'\par
'Take the hilt,' said Gandalf, 'and speak after the Lord, if you are\par
resolved on this.'\par
'I am,' said Pippin.\par
The old man laid the sword along his lap, and Pippin put his hand to the\par
hilt, and said slowly after Denethor:\par
'Here do I swear fealty and service to Gondor, and to the Lord and\par
Steward of the realm, to speak and to be silent, to do and to let be, to come\par
and to go, in need or plenty, in peace or war, in living or dying, from this\par
hour henceforth, until my lord release me, or death take me, or the world end.\par
So say I, Peregrin son of Paladin of the Shire of the Halflings.'\par
And this do I hear, Denethor son of Ecthelion, Lord of Gondor, Steward of\par
the High King, and I will not forget it, nor fail to reward that which is\par
given: fealty with love, valour with honour, oath-breaking with vengeance.'\par
Then Pippin received back his sword and put it in its sheath.\par
'And now,' said Denethor, 'my first command to you: speak and be not\par
silent! Tell me your full tale, and see that you recall all that you can of\par
Boromir, my son. Sit now and begin!' As he spoke he struck a small silver gong\par
that stood near his footstool, and at once servants came forward. Pippin saw\par
then that they had been standing in alcoves on either side of the door, unseen\par
as he and Gandalf entered.\par
'Bring wine and food and seats for the guests,' said Denethor, 'and see\par
that none trouble us for one hour.'\par
'It is all that I have to spare, for there is much else to heed,' he said\par
to Gandalf. 'Much of more import, it may seem, and yet to me less pressing.\par
But maybe we can speak again at the end of the day.'\par
'And earlier, it is to be hoped,' said Gandalf. 'For I have not ridden\par
hither from Isengard, one hundred and fifty leagues, with the speed of wind,\par
only to bring you one small warrior, however courteous. Is it naught to you\par
that Th\'e9oden has fought a great battle and that Isengard is overthrown, and\par
that I have broken the staff of Saruman?'\par
'It is much to me. But I know already sufficient of these deeds for my\par
own counsel against the menace of the East.' He turned his dark eyes on\par
Gandalf, and now Pippin saw a likeness between the two, and he felt the strain\par
between them, almost as if he saw a line of smouldering fire, drawn from eye\par
to eye, that might suddenly burst into flame.\par
Denethor looked indeed much more like a great wizard than Gandalf did,\par
more kingly, beautiful, and powerful; and older. Yet by a sense other than\par
sight Pippin perceived that Gandalf had the greater power and the deeper\par
wisdom, and a majesty that was veiled. And he was older, far older. 'How much\par
older?' he wondered, and then he thought how odd it was that he had never\par
thought about it before. Treebeard had said something about wizards, but even\par
then he had not thought of Gandalf as one of them. What was Gandalf? In what\par
far time and place did he come into the world, and when would he leave it? And\par
then his musings broke off, and he saw that Denethor and Gandalf still looked\par
each other in the eye, as if reading the other's mind. But it was Denethor who\par
first withdrew his gaze.\par
'Yea,' he said; 'for though the Stones be lost, they say, still the lords\par
of Gondor have keener sight than lesser men, and many messages come to them.\par
But sit now!'\par
Then men came bearing a chair and a low stool, and one brought a salver\par
with a silver flagon and cups, and white cakes. Pippin sat down, but he could\par
not take his eyes from the old lord. Was it so, or had he only imagined it,\par
that as he spoke of the Stones a sudden gleam of his eye had glanced upon\par
Pippin's face?\par
'Now tell me your tale, my liege,' said Denethor, half kindly; half\par
mockingly. 'For the words of one whom my son so befriended will be welcome\par
indeed.'\par
Pippin never forgot that hour in the great hall under the piercing eye of\par
the Lord of Gondor, stabbed ever and anon by his shrewd questions, and all the\par
while conscious of Gandalf at his side, watching and listening, and (so Pippin\par
felt) holding in check a rising wrath and impatience. When the hour was over\par
and Denethor again rang the gong, Pippin felt worn out. 'It cannot be more\par
than nine o'clock,' he thought. 'I could now eat three breakfasts on end.'\par
'Lead the Lord Mithrandir to the housing prepared for him,' said\par
Denethor, 'and his companion may lodge with him for the present, if he will.\par
But be it known that I have now sworn him to my service, and he shall be known\par
as Peregrin son of Paladin and taught the lesser pass-words. Send word to the\par
Captains that they shall wait on me here, as soon as may be after the third\par
hour has rung.\par
'And you, my Lord Mithrandir, shall come too, as and when you will. None\par
shall hinder your coming to me at any time, save only in my brief hours of\par
sleep. Let your wrath at an old man's folly run off and then return to my\par
comfort!'\par
'Folly?' said Gandalf. 'Nay, my lord, when you are a dotard you will die.\par
You can use even your grief as a cloak. Do you think that I do not understand\par
your purpose in questioning for an hour one who knows the least, while I sit\par
by?'\par
'If you understand it, then be content,' returned Denethor. 'Pride would\par
be folly that disdained help and counsel at need; but you deal out such gifts\par
according to your own designs. Yet the Lord of Gondor is not to be made the\par
tool of other men's purposes, however worthy. And to him there is no purpose\par
higher in the world as it now stands than the good of Gondor; and the rule of\par
Gondor, my lord, is mine and no other man's, unless the king should come\par
again.'\par
'Unless the king should come again?' said Gandalf. 'Well, my lord\par
Steward, it is your task to keep some kingdom still against that event, which\par
few now look to see. In that task you shall have all the aid that you are\par
pleased to ask for. But I will say this: the rule of no realm is mine, neither\par
of Gondor nor any other, great or small. But all worthy things that are in\par
peril as the world now stands, those are my care. And for my part, I shall not\par
wholly fail of my task, though Gondor should perish, if anything passes\par
through this night that can still grow fair or bear fruit and flower again in\par
days to come. For I also am a steward. Did you not know?' And with that he\par
turned and strode from the hall with Pippin running at his side.\par
Gandalf did not look at Pippin or speak a word to him as they went. Their\par
guide brought them from the doors of the hall, and then led them across the\par
Court of the Fountain into a lane between tall buildings of stone. After\par
several turns they came to a house close to the wall of the citadel upon the\par
north side, not far from the shoulder that linked the hill with the mountain.\par
Within, upon the first floor above the street, up a wide carven stair, he\par
showed them to a fair room, light and airy, with goodly hangings of dull gold\par
sheen unfigured. It was sparely furnished, having but a small table, two\par
chairs and a bench; but at either side there were curtained alcoves and wellclad\par
beds within with vessels and basins for washing. There were three high\par
narrow windows that looked northward over the great curve of Anduin, still\par
shrouded in mists, towards the Emyn Muil and Rauros far away. Pippin had to\par
climb on the bench to look out over the deep stone sill.\par
'Are you angry with me, Gandalf?' he said, as their guide went out and\par
closed the door. 'I did the best I could.'\par
'You did indeed!' said Gandalf, laughing suddenly; and he came and stood\par
beside Pippin, putting his arm about the hobbit's shoulders and gazing out of\par
the window. Pippin glanced in some wonder at the face now close beside his\par
own, for the sound of that laugh had been gay and merry. Yet in the wizard's\par
face he saw at first only lines of care and sorrow; though as he looked more\par
intently he perceived that under all there was a great joy: a fountain of\par
mirth enough to set a kingdom laughing, were it to gush forth.\par
'Indeed you did your best,' said the wizard; 'and I hope that it may be\par
long before you find yourself in such a tight corner again between two such\par
terrible old men. Still the Lord of Gondor learned more from you than you may\par
have guessed, Pippin. You could not hide the fact that Boromir did not lead\par
the Company from Moria, and that there was one among you of high honour who\par
was coming to Minas Tirith; and that he had a famous sword. Men think much\par
about the stories of old days in Gondor; and Denethor has given long thought\par
to the rhyme and to the words _Isildur's Bane_, since Boromir went away.\par
'He is not as other men of this time, Pippin, and whatever be his descent\par
from father to son, by some chance the blood of Westernesse runs nearly true\par
in him; as it does in his other son, Faramir, and yet did not in Boromir whom\par
he loved best. He has long sight. He can perceive, if he bends his will\par
thither, much of what is passing in the minds of men, even of those that dwell\par
far off. It is difficult to deceive him, and dangerous to try.\par
'Remember that! For you are now sworn to his service. I do not know what\par
put it into your head, or your heart, to do that. But it was well done. I did\par
not hinder it, for generous deed should not be checked by cold counsel. It\par
touched his heart, as well (may I say it) as pleasing his humour. And at least\par
you are free now to move about as you will in Minas Tirith \endash  when you are not\par
on duty. For there is another side to it. You are at his command; and he will\par
not forget. Be wary still!'\par
He fell silent and sighed. 'Well, no need to brood on what tomorrow may\par
bring. For one thing, tomorrow will be certain to bring worse than today, for\par
many days to come. And there is nothing more that I can do to help it. The\par
board is set, and the pieces are moving. One piece that I greatly desire to\par
find is Faramir, now the heir of Denethor. I do not think that he is in the\par
City; but I have had no time to gather news. I must go. Pippin. I must go to\par
this lords' council and learn what I can. But the Enemy has the move, and he\par
is about to open his full game. And pawns are likely to see as much of it as\par
any, Peregrin son of Paladin, soldier of Gondor. Sharpen your blade!'\par
Gandalf went to the door, and there he turned. 'I am in haste Pippin,' he\par
said. 'Do me a favour when you go out. Even before you rest, if you are not\par
too weary. Go and find Shadowfax and see how he is housed. These people are\par
kindly to beasts, for they are a good and wise folk, but they have less skill\par
with horses than some.'\par
With that Gandalf went out; and as he did so, there came the note of a\par
clear sweet bell ringing in a tower of the citadel. Three strokes it rang,\par
like silver in the air, and ceased: the third hour from the rising of the sun.\par
After a minute Pippin went to the door and down the stair and looked\par
about the street. The sun was now shining warm and bright, and the towers and\par
tall houses cast long clear-cut shadows westward. High in the blue air Mount\par
Mindolluin lifted its white helm and snowy cloak. Armed men went to and fro in\par
the ways of the City, as if going at the striking of the hour to changes of\par
post and duty.\par
'Nine o'clock we'd call it in the Shire,' said Pippin aloud to himself.\par
'Just the time for a nice breakfast by the open window in spring sunshine. And\par
how I should like breakfast! Do these people ever have it, or is it over? And\par
when do they have dinner, and where?'\par
Presently he noticed a man, clad in black and white, coming along the\par
narrow street from the centre of the citadel towards him. Pippin felt lonely\par
and made up his mind to speak as the man passed; but he had no need. The man\par
came straight up to him.\par
'You are Peregrin the Halfling?' he said. 'I am told that you have been\par
sworn to the service of the Lord and of the City. Welcome! He held out his\par
hand and Pippin took it.\par
'I am named Beregond son of Baranor. I have no duty this morning, and I\par
have been sent to you to teach you the pass-words, and to tell you some of the\par
many things that no doubt you will wish to know. And for my part, I would\par
learn of you also. For never before have we seen a halfling in this land and\par
though we have heard rumour of them, little is said of them in any tale that\par
we know. Moreover you are a friend of Mithrandir. Do you know him well?'\par
'Well,' said Pippin. 'I have known _of_ him all my short life, as you\par
might say; and lately I have travelled far with him. But there is much to read\par
in that book, and I cannot claim to have seen more than a page or two. Yet\par
perhaps I know him as well as any but a few. Aragorn was the only one of our\par
Company, I think, who really knew him.'\par
'Aragorn?' said Beregond. 'Who is he?'\par
'Oh,' stammered Pippin, 'he was a man who went about with us. I think he\par
is in Rohan now.'\par
'You have been in Rohan, I hear. There is much that I would ask you of\par
that land also; for we put much of what little hope we have in its people. But\par
I am forgetting my errand, which was first to answer what you would ask. What\par
would you know, Master Peregrin?'\par
'Er well,' said Pippin, 'if I may venture to say so, rather a burning\par
question in my mind at present is, well, what about breakfast and all that? I\par
mean, what are the meal-times, if you understand me, and where is the diningroom,\par
if there is one? And the inns? I looked, but never a one could I see as\par
we rode up, though I had been borne up by the hope of a draught of ale as soon\par
as we came to the homes of wise and courtly men.'\par
Beregond looked at him gravely. 'An old campaigner, I see,' he said.\par
'They say that men who go warring afield look ever to the next hope of food\par
and of drink; though I am not a travelled man myself. Then you have not yet\par
eaten today?'\par
'Well, yes, to speak in courtesy, yes,' said Pippin. 'But no more than a\par
cup of wine and a white cake or two by the kindness of your lord; but he\par
racked me for it with an hour of questions, and that is hungry work.'\par
Beregond laughed. 'At the table small men may do the greater deeds, we\par
say. But you have broken your fast as well as any man in the Citadel, and with\par
greater honour. This is a fortress and a tower of guard and is now in posture\par
of war. We rise ere the Sun, and take a morsel in the grey light, and go to\par
our duties at the opening hour. But do not despair!' He laughed again, seeing\par
the dismay in Pippin's face. 'Those who have had heavy duty take somewhat to\par
refresh their strength in the mid-morning. Then there is the nuncheon, at noon\par
or after as duties allow; and men gather for the daymeal, and such mirth as\par
there still may be, about the hour of sunset.\par
'Come! We will walk a little and then go find us some refreshment, and\par
eat and drink on the battlement, and survey the fair morning.'\par
'One moment!' said Pippin blushing. 'Greed, or hunger by your courtesy,\par
put it out of my mind. But Gandalf, Mithrandir as you call him, asked me to\par
see to his horse \endash  Shadowfax, a great steed of Rohan, and the apple of the\par
king's eye, I am told, though he has given him to Mithrandir for his services.\par
I think his new master loves the beast better than he loves many men, and if\par
his good will is of any value to this city, you will treat Shadowfax with all\par
honour: with greater kindness than you have treated this hobbit, if it is\par
possible.'\par
'Hobbit?' said Beregond.\par
'That is what we call ourselves,' said Pippin.\par
'I am glad to learn it,' said Beregond, 'for now I may say that strange\par
accents do not mar fair speech, and hobbits are a fair-spoken folk. But come!\par
You shall make me acquainted with this good horse. I love beasts, and we see\par
them seldom in this stony city; for my people came from the mountain-vales,\par
and before that from Ithilien. But fear not! The visit shall be short, a mere\par
call of courtesy, and we will go thence to the butteries.'\par
Pippin found that Shadowfax had been well housed and tended. For in the\par
sixth circle, outside the walls of the citadel, there were some fair stables\par
where a few swift horses were kept, hard by the lodgings of the errand-riders\par
of the Lord: messengers always ready to go at the urgent command of Denethor\par
or his chief captains. But now all the horses and the riders were out and\par
away.\par
Shadowfax whinnied as Pippin entered the stable and turned his head.\par
'Good morning!' said Pippin. 'Gandalf will come as soon as he may. He is busy,\par
but he sends greetings, and I am to see that all is well with you; and you\par
resting, I hope, after your long labours.'\par
Shadowfax tossed his head and stamped. But he allowed Beregond to handle\par
his head gently and stroke his great flanks.\par
'He looks as if he were spoiling for a race, and not newly come from a\par
great journey,' said Beregond. 'How strong and proud he is! Where is his\par
harness? It should be rich and fair.'\par
'None is rich and fair enough for him,' said Pippin. 'He will have none.\par
If he will consent to bear you, bear you he does; and if not, well, no bit,\par
bridle, whip, or thong will tame him. Farewell, Shadowfax! Have patience.\par
Battle is coming.'\par
Shadowfax lifted up his head and neighed, so that the stable shook, and\par
they covered their ears. Then they took their leave, seeing that the manger\par
was well filled.\par
'And now for our manger,' said Beregond, and he led Pippin back to the\par
citadel, and so to a door in the north side of the great tower. There they\par
went down a long cool stair into a wide alley lit with lamps. There were\par
hatches in the walls at the side, and one of these was open.\par
'This is the storehouse and buttery of my company of the Guard.' said\par
Beregond. 'Greetings, Targon!' he called through the hatch. 'It is early yet,\par
but here is a newcomer that the Lord has taken into his service. He has ridden\par
long and far with a tight belt, and has had sore labour this morning, and he\par
is hungry. Give us what you have!'\par
They got there bread, and butter, and cheese and apples: the last of the\par
winter store, wrinkled but sound and sweet; and a leather flagon of new-drawn\par
ale, and wooden platters and cups. They put all into a wicker basket and\par
climbed back into the sun; and Beregond brought Pippin to a place at the east\par
end of the great out-thrust battlement where there was an embrasure in the\par
walls with a stone seat beneath the sill. From there they could look out on\par
the morning over the world.\par
They ate and drank; and they talked now of Gondor and its ways and\par
customs, now of the Shire and the strange countries that Pippin had seen. And\par
ever as they talked Beregond was more amazed, and looked with greater wonder\par
at the hobbit, swinging his short legs as he sat on the seat, or standing\par
tiptoe upon it to peer over the sill at the lands below.\par
'I will not hide from you, Master Peregrin,' said Beregond, 'that to us\par
you look almost as one of our children, a lad of nine summers or so; and yet\par
you have endured perils and seen marvels that few of our greybeards could\par
boast of. I thought it was the whim of our Lord to take him a noble page,\par
after the manner of the kings of old, they say. But I see that it is not so,\par
and you must pardon my foolishness.'\par
'I do,' said Pippin. 'Though you are not far wrong. I am still little\par
more than a boy in the reckoning of my own people, and it will be four years\par
yet before I "come of age", as we say in the Shire: But do not bother about\par
me. Come and look and tell me what I can see.'\par
The sun was now climbing, and the mists in the vale below had been drawn\par
up. The last of them were floating away, just overhead, as wisps of white\par
cloud borne on the stiffening breeze from the East, that was now flapping and\par
tugging the flags and white standards of the citadel. Away down in the valleybottom,\par
five leagues or so as the eye leaps, the Great River could now be seen\par
grey and glittering, coming out of the north-west, and bending in a mighty\par
sweep south and west again, till it was lost to view in a haze and shimmer,\par
far beyond which lay the Sea fifty leagues away.\par
Pippin could see all the Pelennor laid out before him, dotted into the\par
distance with farmsteads and little walls, barns and byres, but nowhere could\par
he see any kine or other beasts. Many roads and tracks crossed the green\par
fields, and there was much coming and going: wains moving in lines towards the\par
Great Gate, and others passing out. Now and again a horseman would ride up,\par
and leap from the saddle and hasten into the City. But most of the traffic\par
went out along the chief highway, and that turned south, and then bending\par
swifter than the River skirted the hills and passed soon from sight. It was\par
wide and well-paved, and along its eastern edge ran a broad green ridingtrack,\par
and beyond that a wall. On the ride horsemen galloped to and fro, but\par
all the street seemed to be choked with great covered wains going south. But\par
soon Pippin saw that all was in fact well-ordered: the wains were moving in\par
three lines, one swifter drawn by horses; another slower, great waggons with\par
fair housings of many colours, drawn by oxen; and along the west rim of the\par
road many smaller carts hauled by trudging men.\par
'That is the road to the vales of Tumladen and Lossarnach, and the\par
mountain-villages, and then on to Lebennin,' said Beregond. 'There go the last\par
of the wains that bear away to refuge the aged the children, and the women\par
that must go with them. They must all be gone from the Gate and the road clear\par
for a league before noon: that was the order. It is a sad necessity.' He\par
sighed. 'Few, maybe, of those now sundered will meet again. And there were\par
always too few children in this city; but now there are none-save some young\par
lads that will not depart, and may find some task to do: my own son is one of\par
them.'\par
They fell silent for a while. Pippin gazed anxiously eastward, as if at\par
any moment he might see thousands of orcs pouring over the fields. 'What can I\par
see there?' he asked, pointing down to the middle of the great curve of the\par
Anduin. 'Is that another city, or what is it?'\par
'It was a city,' said Beregond, 'the chief city of Gondor, of which this\par
was only a fortress. For that is the ruin of Osgiliath on either side of\par
Anduin, which our enemies took and burned long ago. Yet we won it back in the\par
days of the youth of Denethor: not to dwell in, but to hold as an outpost, and\par
to rebuild the bridge for the passage of our arms. And then came the Fell\par
Riders out of Minas Morgul.'\par
'The Black Riders?' said Pippin, opening his eyes, and they were wide and\par
dark with an old fear re-awakened.\par
'Yes, they were black,' said Beregond, 'and I see that you know something\par
of them, though you have not spoken of them in any of your tales.'\par
'I know of them,' said Pippin softly, 'but I will not speak of them now,\par
so near, so near.' He broke off and lifted his eyes above the River, and it\par
seemed to him that all he could see was a vast and threatening shadow. Perhaps\par
it was mountains looming on the verge of sight, their jagged edges softened by\par
wellnigh twenty leagues of misty air; perhaps it was but a cloud-wall, and\par
beyond that again a yet deeper gloom. But even as he looked it seemed to his\par
eyes that the gloom was growing and gathering, very slowly, slowly rising to\par
smother the regions of the sun.\par
'So near to Mordor?' said Beregond quietly. 'Yes, there it lies. We\par
seldom name it; but we have dwelt ever in sight of that shadow: sometimes it\par
seems fainter and more distant; sometimes nearer and darker. It is growing and\par
darkening now; and therefore our fear and disquiet grow too. And the Fell\par
Riders, less than a year ago they won back the crossings, and many of our best\par
men were slain. Boromir it was that drove the enemy at last back from this\par
western shore, and we hold still the near half of Osgiliath. For a little\par
while. But we await now a new onslaught there. Maybe the chief onslaught of\par
the war that comes.'\par
'When?' said Pippin. 'Have you a guess? For I saw the beacons last night\par
and the errand-riders; and Gandalf said that it was a sign that war had begun.\par
He seemed in a desperate hurry. But now everything seems to have slowed up\par
again.'\par
'Only because everything is now ready,' said Beregond. 'It is but the\par
deep breath before the plunge.'\par
'But why were the beacons lit last night?'\par
'It is over-late to send for aid when you are already besieged,' answered\par
Beregond. 'But I do not know the counsel of the Lord and his captains. They\par
have many ways of gathering news. And the Lord Denethor is unlike other men:\par
he sees far. Some say that as he sits alone in his high chamber in the Tower\par
at night, and bends his thought this way and that, he can read somewhat of the\par
future; and that he will at times search even the mind of the Enemy, wrestling\par
with him. And so it is that he is old, worn before his time. But however that\par
may be, my lord Faramir is abroad, beyond the River on some perilous errand,\par
and he may have sent tidings.\par
'But if you would know what I think set the beacons ablaze, it was the\par
news that came yestereve out of Lebennin. There is a great fleet drawing near\par
to the mouths of Anduin, manned by the corsairs of Umbar in the South. They\par
have long ceased to fear the might of Gondor, and they have allied them with\par
the Enemy, and now make a heavy stroke in his cause. For this attack will draw\par
off much of the help that we looked to have from Lebennin and Belfalas, where\par
folk are hardy and numerous. All the more do our thoughts go north to Rohan;\par
and the more glad are we for these tidings of victory that you bring.\par
'And yet' \endash  he paused and stood up, and looked round, north, east, and\par
south \endash  'the doings at Isengard should warn us that we are caught now in a\par
great net and strategy. This is no longer a bickering at the fords, raiding\par
from Ithilien and from An\'f3rien, ambushing and pillaging. This is a great war\par
long-planned, and we are but one piece in it, whatever pride may say. Things\par
move in the far East beyond the Inland Sea, it is reported; and north in\par
Mirkwood and beyond; and south in Harad. And now all realms shall be put to\par
the test, to stand, or fall \endash  under the Shadow.\par
'Yet, Master Peregrin, we have this honour: ever we bear the brunt of the\par
chief hatred of the Dark Lord, for that hatred comes down out of the depths of\par
time and over the deeps of the Sea. Here will the hammer-stroke fall hardest.\par
And for that reason Mithrandir came hither in such haste. For if we fall, who\par
shall stand? And, Master Peregrin, do you see any hope that we shall stand?'\par
Pippin did not answer. He looked at the great walls, and the towers and\par
brave banners, and the sun in the high sky, and then at the gathering gloom in\par
the East; and he thought of the long fingers of that Shadow: of the orcs in\par
the woods and the mountains, the treason of Isengard, the birds of evil eye,\par
and the Black Riders even in the lanes of the Shire \endash  and of the winged\par
terror, the Nazg\'fbl. He shuddered, and hope seemed to wither. And even at that\par
moment the sun for a second faltered and was obscured, as though a dark wing\par
had passed across it. Almost beyond hearing he thought he caught, high and far\par
up in the heavens, a cry: faint, but heart-quelling, cruel and cold. He\par
blanched and cowered against the wall.\par
'What was that?' asked Beregond. 'You also felt something?'\par
'Yes,' muttered Pippin. 'It is the sign of our fall, and the shadow of\par
doom, a Fell Rider of the air.'\par
'Yes, the shadow of doom,' said Beregond. 'I fear that Minas Tirith shall\par
fall. Night comes. The very warmth of my blood seems stolen away.'\par
For a time they sat together with bowed heads and did not speak. Then\par
suddenly Pippin looked up and saw that the sun was still shining and the\par
banners still streaming in the breeze. He shook himself. 'It is passed,' he\par
said. 'No, my heart will not yet despair. Gandalf fell and has returned and is\par
with us. We may stand, if only on one leg, or at least be left still upon our\par
knees.'\par
'Rightly said!' cried Beregond, rising and striding to and fro. 'Nay,\par
though all things must come utterly to an end in time, Gondor shall not perish\par
yet. Not though the walls be taken by a reckless foe that will build a hill of\par
carrion before them. There are still other fastnesses, and secret ways of\par
escape into the mountains. Hope and memory shall live still in some hidden\par
valley where the grass is green.'\par
'All the same, I wish it was over for good or ill.' said Pippin. 'I am no\par
warrior at all and dislike any thought of battle; but waiting on the edge of\par
one that I can't escape is worst of all. What a long day it seems already! I\par
should be happier, if we were not obliged to stand and watch, making no move,\par
striking nowhere first. No stroke would have been struck in Rohan, I think,\par
but for Gandalf.'\par
'Ah, there you lay your finger on the sore that many feel!' said\par
Beregond. 'But things may change when Faramir returns. He is bold, more bold\par
than many deem; for in these days men are slow to believe that a captain can\par
be wise and learned in the scrolls of lore and song, as he is, and yet a man\par
of hardihood and swift judgement in the field. But such is Faramir. Less\par
reckless and eager than Boromir, but not less resolute. Yet what indeed can he\par
do? We cannot assault the mountains of \endash  of yonder realm. Our reach is\par
shortened, and we cannot strike till some foe comes within it. Then our hand\par
must be heavy!' He smote the hilt of his sword.\par
Pippin looked at him: tall and proud and noble, as all the men that he\par
had yet seen in that land; and with a glitter in his eye as he thought of the\par
battle. 'Alas! my own hand feels as light as a feather,' he thought, but he\par
said nothing. 'A pawn did Gandalf say? Perhaps but on the wrong chessboard.'\par
So they talked until the sun reached its height, and suddenly the noonbells\par
were rung, and there was a stir in the citadel; for all save the\par
watchmen were going to their meal.\par
'Will you come with me?' said Beregond. 'You may join my mess for this\par
day. I do not know to what company you will be assigned; or the Lord may hold\par
you at his own command. But you will be welcome. And it will be well to meet\par
as many men as you may, while there is yet time.'\par
'I shall be glad to come,' said Pippin. 'I am lonely, to tell you the\par
truth. I left my best friend behind in Rohan, and I have had no one to talk to\par
or jest with. Perhaps I could really join your company? Are you the captain?\par
If so, you could take me on, or speak for me?'\par
'Nay, nay,' Beregond laughed, 'I am no captain. Neither office nor rank\par
nor lordship have I, being but a plain man of arms of the Third Company of the\par
Citadel. Yet, Master Peregrin, to be only a man of arms of the Guard of the\par
Tower of Gondor is held worthy in the City, and such men have honour in the\par
land.'\par
'Then it is far beyond me,' said Pippin. 'Take me back to our room, and\par
if Gandalf is not there, I will go where you like \endash  as your guest.'\par
Gandalf was not in the lodging and had sent no message; so Pippin went\par
with Beregond and was made known to the men of the Third Company. And it\par
seemed that Beregond got as much honour from it as his guest, for Pippin was\par
very welcome. There had already been much talk in the citadel about\par
Mithrandir's companion and his long closeting with the Lord; and rumour\par
declared that a Prince of the Halflings had come out of the North to offer\par
allegiance to Gondor and five thousand swords. And some said that when the\par
Riders came from Rohan each would bring behind him a halfling warrior, small\par
maybe, but doughty.\par
Though Pippin had regretfully to destroy this hopeful tale, he could not\par
be rid of his new rank, only fitting, men thought, to one befriended by\par
Boromir and honoured by the Lord Denethor; and they thanked him for coming\par
among them, and hung on his words and stories of the outlands, and gave him as\par
much food and ale as he could wish. Indeed his only trouble was to be 'wary'\par
according to the counsel of Gandalf, and not to let his tongue wag freely\par
after the manner of a hobbit among friends.\par
At length Beregond rose. 'Farewell for this time!' he said. 'I have duty\par
now till sundown, as have all the others here, I think. But if you are lonely,\par
as you say, maybe you would like a merry guide about the City. My son would go\par
with you gladly. A good lad, I may say. If that pleases you, go down to the\par
lowest circle and ask for the Old Guesthouse in the Rath Celerdain, the\par
Lampwrights' Street. You will find him there with other lads that are\par
remaining in the City. There may be things worth seeing down at the Great Gate\par
ere the closing.'\par
He went out, and soon after all the others followed. The day was still\par
fine, though it was growing hazy, and it was hot for March, even so far\par
southwards. Pippin felt sleepy, but the lodging seemed cheerless, and he\par
decided to go down and explore the City. He took a few morsels that he had\par
saved to Shadowfax, and they were graciously accepted, though the horse seemed\par
to have no lack. Then he walked on down many winding ways.\par
People stared much as he passed. To his face men were gravely courteous,\par
saluting him after the manner of Gondor with bowed head and hands upon the\par
breast; but behind him he heard many calls, as those out of doors cried to\par
others within to come and see the Prince of the Halflings, the companion of\par
Mithrandir. Many used some other tongue than the Common Speech, but it was not\par
long before he learned at least what was meant by _Ernil i Pheriannath_ and\par
knew that his title had gone down before him into the City.\par
He came at last by arched streets and many fair alleys and pavements to\par
the lowest and widest circle, and there he was directed to the Lampwrights'\par
Street, a broad way running towards the Great Gate. In it he found the Old\par
Guesthouse, a large building of grey weathered stone with two wings running\par
back from the street, and between them a narrow greensward, behind which was\par
the many-windowed house, fronted along its whole width by a pillared porch and\par
a flight of steps down on to the grass. Boys were playing among the pillars,\par
the only children that Pippin had seen in Minas Tirith, and he stopped to look\par
at them. Presently one of them caught sight of him, and with a shout he sprang\par
across the grass and came into the street, followed by several others. There\par
he stood in front of Pippin, looking him up and down.\par
'Greetings!' said the lad. 'Where do you come from? You are a stranger in\par
the City.'\par
'I was,' said Pippin; 'but they say I have become a man of Gondor.'\par
'Oh come!' said the lad. 'Then we are all men here. But how old are you,\par
and what is your name? I am ten years already, and shall soon be five feet. I\par
am taller than you. But then my father is a Guard, one of the tallest. What is\par
your father?'\par
'Which question shall I answer first?' said Pippin. 'My father farms the\par
lands round Whitwell near Tuckborough in the Shire. I am nearly twenty-nine,\par
so I pass you there; though I am but four feet, and not likely to grow any\par
more, save sideways.'\par
'Twenty-nine!' said the lad and whistled. 'Why, you are quite old! As old\par
as my uncle Iorlas. Still,' he added hopefully, 'I wager I could stand you on\par
your head or lay you on your back.'\par
'Maybe you could, if I let you,' said Pippin with a laugh. 'And maybe I\par
could do the same to you: we know some wrestling tricks in my little country.\par
Where, let me tell you, I am considered uncommonly large and strong; and I\par
have never allowed anyone to stand me on my head. So if it came to a trial and\par
nothing else would serve, I might have to kill you. For when you are older,\par
you will learn that folk are not always what they seem; and though you may\par
have taken me for a soft stranger-lad and easy prey, let me warn you: I am\par
not, I am a halfling, hard, bold, and wicked!' Pippin pulled such a grim face\par
that the boy stepped back a pace, but at once he returned with clenched fists\par
and the light of battle in his eye.\par
'No!' Pippin laughed. 'Don't believe what strangers say of themselves\par
either! I am not a fighter. But it would be politer in any case for the\par
challenger to say who he is.'\par
The boy drew himself up proudly. 'I am Bergil son of Beregond of the\par
Guards,' he said.\par
'So I thought,' said Pippin, 'for you look like your father. I know him\par
and he sent me to find you.'\par
'Then why did you not say so at once?' said Bergil, and suddenly a look\par
of dismay came over his face. 'Do not tell me that he has changed his mind,\par
and will send me away with the maidens! But no, the last wains have gone.'\par
'His message is less bad than that, if not good.' said Pippin. 'He says\par
that if you would prefer it to standing me on my head, you might show me round\par
the City for a while and cheer my loneliness. I can tell you some tales of far\par
countries in return.'\par
Bergil clapped his hands, and laughed with relief. 'All is well,' he\par
cried. 'Come then! We were soon going to the Gate to look on. We will go now.'\par
'What is happening there?'\par
'The Captains of the Outlands are expected up the South Road ere sundown.\par
Come with us and you will see.'\par
Bergil proved a good comrade, the best company Pippin had had since he\par
parted from Merry, and soon they were laughing and talking gaily as they went\par
about the streets, heedless of the many glances that men gave them. Before\par
long they found themselves in a throng going towards the Great Gate. There\par
Pippin went up much in the esteem of Bergil, for when he spoke his name and\par
the pass-word the guard saluted him and let him pass through; and what was\par
more, he allowed him to take his companion with him.\par
'That is good!' said Bergil. 'We boys are no longer allowed to pass the\par
Gate without an elder. Now we shall see better.'\par
Beyond the Gate there was a crowd of men along the verge of the road and\par
of the great paved space into which all the ways to Minas Tirith ran. All eyes\par
were turned southwards, and soon a murmur rose: 'There is dust away there!\par
They are coming!'\par
Pippin and Bergil edged their way forward to the front of the crowd, and\par
waited. Horns sounded at some distance, and the noise of cheering rolled\par
towards them like a gathering wind. Then there was a loud trumpet-blast, and\par
all about them people were shouting.\par
'Forlong! Forlong!' Pippin heard men calling. 'What do they say?' he\par
asked.\par
'Forlong has come,' Bergil answered; 'old Forlong the Fat, the Lord of\par
Lossarnach. That is where my grandsire lives. Hurrah! Here he is. Good old\par
Forlong!'\par
Leading the line there came walking a big thick-limbed horse, and on it\par
sat a man of wide shoulders and huge girth, but old and grey-bearded, yet\par
mail-clad and black-helmed and bearing a long heavy spear. Behind him marched\par
proudly a dusty line of men, well-armed and bearing great battle-axes; grimfaced\par
they were, and shorter and somewhat swarthier than any men that Pippin\par
had yet seen in Gondor.\par
'Forlong!' men shouted. 'True heart, true friend! Forlong!' But when the\par
men of Lossarnach had passed they muttered: 'So few! Two hundreds, what are\par
they? We hoped for ten times the number. That will be the new tidings of the\par
black fleet. They are sparing only a tithe of their strength. Still every\par
little is a gain.'\par
And so the companies came and were hailed and cheered and passed through\par
the Gate, men of the Outlands marching to defend the City of Gondor in a dark\par
hour; but always too few, always less than hope looked for or need asked. The\par
men of Ringl\'f3 Vale behind the son of their lord, Dervorin striding on foot:\par
three hundreds. From the uplands of Morthond, the great Blackroot Vale, tall\par
Duinhir with his sons, Duilin and Derufin, and five hundred bowmen. From the\par
Anfalas, the Langstrand far away, a long line of men of many sorts, hunters\par
and herdsmen and men of little villages, scantily equipped save for the\par
household of Golasgil their lord. From Lamedon, a few grim hillmen without a\par
captain. Fisher-folk of the Ethir, some hundred or more spared from the ships.\par
Hirluin the Fair of the Green Hills from Pinnath Gelin with three hundreds of\par
gallant green-clad men. And last and proudest, Imrahil, Prince of Dol Amroth,\par
kinsman of the Lord, with gilded banners bearing his token of the Ship and the\par
Silver Swan, and a company of knights in full harness riding grey horses; and\par
behind them seven hundreds of men at arms, tall as lords, grey-eyed, darkhaired,\par
singing as they came.\par
And that was all, less than three thousands full told. No more would\par
come. Their cries and the tramp of their feet passed into the City and died\par
away. The onlookers stood silent for a while. Dust hung in the air, for the\par
wind had died and the evening was heavy. Already the closing hour was drawing\par
nigh, and the red sun had gone behind Mindolluin. Shadow came down on the\par
City.\par
Pippin looked up, and it seemed to him that the sky had grown ashen-grey,\par
as if a vast dust and smoke hung above them, and light came dully through it.\par
But in the West the dying sun had set all the fume on fire, and now Mindolluin\par
stood black against a burning smoulder flecked with embers. 'So ends a fair\par
day in wrath!' he said forgetful of the lad at his side.\par
'So it will, if I have not returned before the sundown-bells,' said\par
Bergil. 'Come! There goes the trumpet for the closing of the Gate.'\par
Hand in hand they went back into the City, the last to pass the Gate\par
before it was shut; and as they reached the Lampwrights' Street all the bells\par
in the towers tolled solemnly. Lights sprang in many windows, and from the\par
houses and wards of the men at arms along the walls there came the sound of\par
song.\par
'Farewell for this time,' said Bergil. 'Take my greetings to my :father,\par
and thank him for the company that he sent. Come again soon, I beg. Almost I\par
wish now that there was no war, for we might have had some merry times. We\par
might have journeyed to Lossarnach, to my grandsire's house; it is good to be\par
there in Spring, the woods and fields are full of flowers. But maybe we will\par
go thither together yet. They will never overcome our Lord, and my father is\par
very valiant. Farewell and return!'\par
They parted and Pippin hurried back towards the citadel. It seemed a long\par
way, and he grew hot and very hungry; and night closed down swift and dark.\par
Not a star pricked the sky. He was late for the daymeal in the mess, and\par
Beregond greeted him gladly, and sat him at his side to hear news of his son.\par
After the meal Pippin stayed a while, and then took his leave, for a strange\par
gloom was on him, and now he desired very much to see Gandalf again.\par
'Can you find your way?' said Beregond at the door of the small hall, on\par
the north side of the citadel, where they had sat. 'It is a black night, and\par
all the blacker since orders came that lights are to be dimmed within the\par
City, and none are to shine out from the walls. And I can give you news of\par
another order: you will be summoned to the Lord Denethor early tomorrow. I\par
fear you will not be for the Third Company. Still we may hope to meet again.\par
Farewell and sleep in peace!'\par
The lodging was dark, save for a little lantern set on the table. Gandalf\par
was not there. Gloom settled still more heavily on Pippin. He climbed on the\par
bench and tried to peer out of a window, but it was like looking into a pool\par
of ink. He got down and closed the shutter and went to bed. For a while he lay\par
and listened for sounds of Gandalf's return, and then he fell into an uneasy\par
sleep.\par
In the night he was wakened by a light, and he saw that Gandalf had come\par
and was pacing to and fro in the room beyond the curtain of the alcove. There\par
were candles on the table and rolls of parchment. He heard the wizard sigh,\par
and mutter: 'When will Faramir return?'\par
'Hullo!' said Pippin, poking his head round the curtain. 'I thought you\par
had forgotten all about me. I am glad to see you back. It has been a long\par
day.'\par
'But the night will be too short,' said Gandalf. 'I have come back here,\par
for I must have a little peace, alone. You should sleep, in a bed while you\par
still may. At the sunrise I shall take you to the Lord Denethor again. No,\par
when the summons comes, not at sunrise. The Darkness has begun. There will be\par
no dawn.'\par
_Chapter 2_\par
The Passing of the Grey Company\par
Gandalf was gone, and the thudding hoofs of Shadowfax were lost in the\par
night, when Merry came back to Aragorn. He had only a light bundle, for he had\par
lost his pack at Parth Galen, and all he had was a few useful things he had\par
picked up among the wreckage of Isengard. Hasufel was already saddled. Legolas\par
and Gimli with their horse stood close by.\par
'So four of the Company still remain,' said Aragorn. 'We will ride on\par
together. But we shall not go alone, as I thought. The king is now determined\par
to set out at once. Since the coming of the winged shadow, he desires to\par
return to the hills under cover of night.'\par
'And then whither?' said Legolas.\par
'I cannot say yet,' Aragorn answered. 'As for the king, he will go to the\par
muster that he commanded at Edoras, four nights from now. And there, I think,\par
he will hear tidings of war, and the Riders of Rohan will go down to Minas\par
Tirith. But for myself, and any that will go with me . . .'\par
'I for one!' cried Legolas. 'And Gimli with him!' said the Dwarf.\par
'Well, for myself,' said Aragorn, 'it is dark before me. I must go down\par
also to Minas Tirith, but I do not yet see the road. An hour long prepared\par
approaches.'\par
'Don't leave me behind!' said Merry. 'I have not been of much use yet;\par
but I don't want to be laid aside, like baggage to be called for when all is\par
over. I don't think the Riders will want to be bothered with me now. Though,\par
of course, the king did say that I was to sit by him when he came to his house\par
and tell him all about the Shire.'\par
'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'and your road lies with him, I think, Merry. But do\par
not look for mirth at the ending. It will be long, I fear, ere Th\'e9oden sits at\par
ease again in Meduseld. Many hopes will wither in this bitter Spring.'\par
Soon all were ready to depart: twenty-four horses, with Gimli behind\par
Legolas, and Merry in front of Aragorn. Presently they were riding swiftly\par
through the night. They had not long passed the mounds at the Fords of Isen,\par
when a Rider galloped up from the rear of their line.\par
'My lord,' he said to the king, 'there are horsemen behind us. As we\par
crossed the fords I thought that I heard them. Now we are sure. They are\par
overtaking us, riding hard.'\par
Th\'e9oden at once called a halt. The Riders turned about and seized their\par
spears. Aragorn dismounted and set Merry on the ground, and drawing his sword\par
he stood by the king's stirrup. \'c9omer and his esquire rode back to the rear.\par
Merry felt more like unneeded baggage than ever, and he wondered, if there was\par
a fight, what he should do. Supposing the king's small escort was trapped and\par
overcome, but he escaped into the darkness \endash  alone in the wild fields of Rohan\par
with no idea of where he was in all the endless miles? 'No good!' he thought.\par
He drew his sword and tightened his belt.\par
The sinking moon was obscured by a great sailing cloud, but suddenly it\par
rode out clear again. Then they all heard the sound of hoofs, and at the same\par
moment they saw dark shapes coming swiftly on the path from the fords. The\par
moonlight glinted here and there on the points of spears. The number of the\par
pursuers could not be told, but they seemed no fewer than the king's escort,\par
at the least.\par
When they were some fifty paces off, \'c9omer cried in a loud voice: 'Halt!\par
Halt! Who rides in Rohan?'\par
The pursuers brought their steeds to a sudden stand. A silence followed:\par
and then in the moonlight, a horseman could be seen dismounting and walking\par
slowly forward. His hand showed white as he held it up, palm outward, in token\par
of peace; but the king's men gripped their weapons. At ten paces the man\par
stopped. He was tall, a dark standing shadow. Then his clear voice rang out.\par
'Rohan? Rohan did you say? That is a glad word. We seek that land in\par
haste from long afar.'\par
'You have found it,' said \'c9omer. 'When you crossed the fords yonder you\par
entered it. But it is the realm of Th\'e9oden the King. None ride here save by\par
his leave. Who are you? And what is your haste?'\par
'Halbarad D\'fanadan, Ranger of the North I am,' cried the man. 'We seek one\par
Aragorn son of Arathorn, and we heard that he was in Rohan.'\par
'And you have found him also!' cried Aragorn. Giving his reins to Merry,\par
he ran forward and embraced the newcomer. 'Halbarad!' he said. 'Of all joys\par
this is the least expected!'\par
Merry breathed a sigh of relief. He had thought that this was some last\par
trick of Saruman's, to waylay the king while he had only a few men about him;\par
but it seemed that there would be no need to die in Th\'e9oden's defence, not yet\par
at any rate. He sheathed his sword.\par
'All is well,' said Aragorn, turning back. 'Here are some of my own kin\par
from the far land where I dwelt. But why they come, and how many they be,\par
Halbarad shall tell us.'\par
'I have thirty with me,' said Halbarad. 'That is all of our kindred that\par
could be gathered in haste; but the brethren Elladan and Elrohir have ridden\par
with us, desiring to go to the war. We rode as swiftly as we might when your\par
summons came.'\par
'But I did not summon you,' said Aragorn, 'save only in wish. My thoughts\par
have often turned to you, and seldom more than tonight; yet I have sent no\par
word. But come! All such matters must wait. You find us riding in haste and\par
danger. Ride with us now, if the king will give his leave.'\par
Th\'e9oden was indeed glad of the news. 'It is well!' he said. 'If these\par
kinsmen be in any way like to yourself, my lord Aragorn, thirty such knights\par
will be a strength that cannot be counted by heads.'\par
Then the Riders set out again, and Aragorn for a while rode with the\par
D\'fanedain; and when they had spoken of tidings in the North and in the South,\par
Elrohir said to him:\par
'I bring word to you from my father: _The days are short. If thou art in\par
haste, remember the Paths of the Dead_.'\par
'Always my days have seemed to me too short to achieve my desire,'\par
answered Aragorn. 'But great indeed will be my haste ere I take that road.'\par
'That will soon be seen,' said Elrohir. 'But let us speak no more of\par
these things upon the open road!'\par
And Aragorn said to Halbarad: 'What is that that you bear, kinsman?' For\par
he saw that instead of a spear he bore a tall staff, as it were a standard,\par
but it was close-furled in a black cloth bound about with many thongs.\par
'It is a gift that I bring you from the Lady of Rivendell,' answered\par
Halbarad. 'She wrought it in secret, and long was the making. But she also\par
sends word to you: _The days now are short. Either our hope cometh, or all\par
hopes end. Therefore I send thee what I have made for thee. Fare well,\par
Elfstone!_'\par
And Aragorn said: 'Now I know what you bear. Bear it still for me a\par
while!' And he turned and looked away to the North under the great stars, and\par
then he fell silent and spoke no more while the night's journey lasted.\par
The night was old and the East grey when they rode up at last from\par
Deeping-coomb and came back to the Hornburg. There they were to lie and rest\par
for a brief while and take counsel.\par
Merry slept until he was roused by Legolas and Gimli. 'The Sun is high,'\par
said Legolas. 'All others are up and doing. Come, Master Sluggard, and look at\par
this place while you may!'\par
'There was a battle here three nights ago,' said Gimli, 'and here Legolas\par
and I played a game that I won only by a single orc. Come and see how it was!\par
And there are caves, Merry, caves of wonder! Shall we visit them, Legolas, do\par
you think?'\par
'Nay! There is no time,' said the Elf. 'Do not spoil the wonder with\par
haste! I have given you my word to return hither with you, if a day of peace\par
and freedom comes again. But it is now near to noon, and at that hour we eat,\par
and then set out again, I hear.'\par
Merry got up and yawned. His few hours' sleep had not been nearly enough;\par
he was tired and rather dismal. He missed Pippin, and felt that he was only a\par
burden, while everybody was making plans for speed in a business that he did\par
not fully understand. 'Where is Aragorn?' he asked.\par
'In a high chamber of the Burg,' said Legolas. 'He has neither rested nor\par
slept, I think. He went thither some hours ago, saying that he must take\par
thought, and only his kinsman, Halbarad, went with him; but some dark doubt or\par
care sits on him.'\par
'They are a strange company, these newcomers,' said Gimli. 'Stout men and\par
lordly they are, and the Riders of Rohan look almost as boys beside them; for\par
they are grim men of face, worn like weathered rocks for the most part, even\par
as Aragorn himself; and they are silent.'\par
'But even as Aragorn they are courteous, if they break their silence.'\par
said Legolas. 'And have you marked the brethren Elladan and Elrohir? Less\par
sombre is their gear than the others', and they are fair and gallant as Elvenlords;\par
and that is not to be wondered at in the sons of Elrond of Rivendell.'\par
'Why have they come? Have you heard?' asked Merry. He had now dressed,\par
and he flung his grey cloak about his shoulders; and the three passed out\par
together towards the ruined gate of the Burg.\par
'They answered a summons, as you heard,' said Gimli. 'Word came to\par
Rivendell, they say: _Aragorn has need of his kindred. Let the D\'fanedain ride\par
to him in Rohan!_ But whence this message came they are now in doubt. Gandalf\par
sent it, I would guess.'\par
'Nay, Galadriel,' said Legolas. 'Did she not speak through Gandalf of the\par
ride of the Grey Company from the North?'\par
'Yes, you have it,' said Gimli. 'The Lady of the Wood! She read many\par
hearts and desires. Now why did not we wish for some of our own kinsfolk,\par
Legolas?'\par
Legolas stood before the gate and turned his bright eyes away north and\par
east, and his fair face was troubled. 'I do not think that any would come,' he\par
answered. 'They have no need to ride to war; war already marches on their own\par
lands.'\par
For a while the three companions walked together, speaking of this and\par
that turn of the battle, and they went down from the broken gate, and passed\par
the mounds of the fallen on the greensward beside the road, until they stood\par
on Helm's Dike and looked into the Coomb. The Death Down already stood there,\par
black and tall and stony, and the great trampling and scoring of the grass by\par
the Huorns could be plainly seen. The Dunlendings and many men of the garrison\par
of the Burg were at work on the Dike or in the fields and about the battered\par
walls behind; yet all seemed strangely quiet: a weary valley resting after a\par
great storm. Soon they turned back and went to the midday meal in the hall of\par
the Burg.\par
The king was already there, and as soon as they entered he called for\par
Merry and had a seat set for him at his side. 'It is not as I would have it,'\par
said Th\'e9oden; 'for this is little like my fair house in Edoras. And your\par
friend is gone, who should also be here. But it may be long ere we sit, you\par
and I, at the high table in Meduseld; there will be no time for feasting when\par
I return thither. But come now! Eat and drink, and let us speak together while\par
we may. And then you shall ride with me.'\par
'May I?' said Merry, surprised and delighted. 'That would be splendid!'\par
He had never felt more grateful for any kindness in words. 'I am afraid I am\par
only in everybody's way,' he stammered; 'but I should like to do anything I\par
could, you know.'\par
'I doubt it not,' said the king. 'I have had a good hill-pony made ready\par
for you. He will bear you as swift as any horse by the roads that we shall\par
take. For I will ride from the Burg by mountain paths, not by the plain, and\par
so come to Edoras by way of Dunharrow where the Lady \'c9owyn awaits me. You\par
shall be my esquire, if you will. Is there gear of war in this place, \'c9omer,\par
that my sword-thain could use?'\par
'There are no great weapon-hoards here, lord.' answered \'c9omer. 'Maybe a\par
light helm might be found to fit him; but we have no mail or sword for one of\par
his stature.'\par
'I have a sword,' said Merry, climbing from his seat, and drawing from\par
its black sheath his small bright blade. Filled suddenly with love for this\par
old man, he knelt on one knee, and took his hand and kissed it. 'May I lay the\par
sword of Meriadoc of the Shire on your lap Th\'e9oden King?' he cried. 'Receive\par
my service, if you will!'\par
'Gladly will I take it,' said the king; and laying his long old hands\par
upon the brown hair of the hobbit; he blessed him. 'Rise now, Meriadoc,\par
esquire of Rohan of the household of Meduseld!' he said. 'Take your sword and\par
bear it unto good fortune!'\par
'As a father you shall be to me,' said Merry.\par
'For a little while,' said Th\'e9oden.\par
They talked then together as they ate, until presently \'c9omer spoke. 'It\par
is near the hour that we set for our going, lord,' he said. 'Shall I bid men\par
sound the horns? But where is Aragorn? His place is empty and he has not\par
eaten.'\par
'We will make ready to ride,' said Th\'e9oden; 'but let word be sent to the\par
Lord Aragorn that the hour is nigh.'\par
The king with his guard and Merry at his side passed down from the gate\par
of the Burg to where the Riders were assembling on the green. Many were\par
already mounted. It would be a great company; for the king was leaving only a\par
small garrison in the Burg, and all who could be spared were riding to the\par
weapontake at Edoras. A thousand spears had indeed already ridden away at\par
night; but still there would be some five hundred more to go with the king,\par
for the most part men from the fields and dales of Westfold.\par
A little apart the Rangers sat, silent, in an ordered company, armed with\par
spear and bow and sword. They were clad in cloaks of dark grey, and their\par
hoods were cast now over helm and head. Their horses were strong and of proud\par
bearing, but rough-haired; and one stood there without a rider, Aragorn's own\par
horse that they had brought from the North; Roheryn was his name. There was no\par
gleam of stone or gold, nor any fair thing in all their gear and harness: nor\par
did their riders bear any badge or token, save only that each cloak was pinned\par
upon the left shoulder by a brooch of silver shaped like a rayed star.\par
The king mounted his horse, Snowmane, and Merry sat beside him on his\par
pony: Stybba was his name. Presently \'c9omer came out from the gate, and with\par
him was Aragorn, and Halbarad bearing the great staff close-furled in black,\par
and two tall men, neither young nor old So much alike were they, the sons of\par
Elrond, that few could tell them apart: dark-haired, grey-eyed, and their\par
faces elven-fair, clad alike in bright mail beneath cloaks of silver-grey.\par
Behind them walked Legolas and Gimli. But Merry had eyes only for Aragorn, so\par
startling was the change that he saw in him, as if in one night many years had\par
fallen on his head. Grim was his face, grey-hued and weary.\par
'I am troubled in mind, lord,' he said, standing by the king's horse. 'I\par
have heard strange words, and I see new perils far off. I have laboured long\par
in thought, and now I fear that I must change my purpose. Tell me, Th\'e9oden,\par
you ride now to Dunharrow, how long will it be ere you come there?'\par
'It is now a full hour past noon,' said \'c9omer. 'Before the night of the\par
third day from now we should come to the Hold. The Moon will then be one night\par
past his full, and the muster that the king commanded will be held the day\par
after. More speed we cannot make, if the strength of Rohan is to be gathered.'\par
Aragorn was silent for a moment. 'Three days,' he murmured, 'and the\par
muster of Rohan will only be begun. But I see that it cannot now be\par
hastened.' He looked up, and it seemed that he had made some decision; his\par
face was less troubled. Then, by our leave, lord, I must take new counsel for\par
myself and my kindred. We must ride our own road, and no longer in secret. For\par
me the time of stealth has passed. I will ride east by the swiftest way, and I\par
will take the Paths of the Dead.'\par
'The Paths of the Dead!' said Th\'e9oden, and trembled. 'Why do you speak of\par
them?' \'c9omer turned and gazed at Aragorn, and it seemed to Merry that the\par
faces of the Riders that sat within hearing turned pale at the words. 'If\par
there be in truth such paths,' said Th\'e9oden, 'their gate is in Dunharrow; but\par
no living man may pass it.'\par
'Alas! Aragorn my friend!' said \'c9omer. 'I had hoped that we should ride\par
to war together; but if you seek the Paths of the Dead, then our parting is\par
come, and it is little likely that we shall ever meet again under the Sun.'\par
'That road I will take, nonetheless,' said Aragorn. 'But I say to you,\par
\'c9omer, that in battle we may yet meet again, though all the hosts of Mordor\par
should stand between.'\par
'You will do as you will, my lord Aragorn,' said Th\'e9oden. 'It is your\par
doom, maybe, to tread strange paths that others dare not. This parting grieves\par
me, and my strength is lessened by it; but now I must take the mountain-roads\par
and delay no longer. Farewell!'\par
'Farewell, lord!' said Aragorn. 'Ride unto great renown! Farewell, Merry!\par
I leave you in good hands, better than we hoped when we hunted the orcs to\par
Fangorn. Legolas and Gimli will still hunt with me, I hope; but we shall not\par
forget you.'\par
'Good-bye!' said Merry. He could find no more to say. He felt very small,\par
and he was puzzled and depressed by all these gloomy words. More than ever he\par
missed the unquenchable cheerfulness of Pippin. The Riders were ready, and\par
their horses were fidgeting; he wished they would start arid get it over.\par
Now Th\'e9oden spoke to \'c9omer, and he lifted up his hand and cried aloud,\par
and with that word the Riders set forth. They rode over the Dike and down the\par
Coomb, and then, turning swiftly eastwards, they took a path that skirted the\par
foothills for a mile or so, until bending south it passed back among the hills\par
and disappeared from view. Aragorn rode to the Dike and watched till the\par
king's men were far down the Coomb. Then he turned to Halbarad.\par
'There go three that I love, and the smallest not the least,' he said.\par
'He knows not to what end he rides; yet if he knew, he still would go on.'\par
'A little people, but of great worth are the Shire-folk,' said Halbarad.\par
'Little do they know of our long labour for the safekeeping of their borders,\par
and yet I grudge it not.'\par
'And now our fates are woven together,' said Aragorn. 'And yet, alas!\par
here we must part. Well, I must eat a little, and then we also must hasten\par
away. Come, Legolas and Gimli! I must speak with you as I eat.'\par
Together they went back into the Burg; yet for some time Aragorn sat\par
silent at the table in the hall, and the others waited for him to speak.\par
'Come!' said Legolas at last. 'Speak and be comforted, and shake off the\par
shadow! What has happened since we came back to this grim place in the grey\par
morning?'\par
'A struggle somewhat grimmer for my part than the battle of the\par
Hornburg,' answered Aragorn. 'I have looked in the Stone of Orthanc, my\par
friends.'\par
'You have looked in that accursed stone of wizardry!' exclaimed Gimli\par
with fear and astonishment in his face. 'Did you say aught to \endash  him? Even\par
Gandalf feared that encounter.'\par
'You forget to whom you speak,' said Aragorn sternly, and his eyes\par
glinted. 'Did I not openly proclaim my title before the doors of Edoras? What\par
do you fear that I should say to him? Nay, Gimli,' he said in a softer voice,\par
and the grimness left his face, and he looked like one who has laboured in\par
sleepless pain for many nights. 'Nay, my friends, I and the lawful master of\par
the Stone, and I had both the right and the strength to use it, or so I\par
judged. The right cannot be doubted. The strength was enough \endash  barely.'\par
He drew a deep breath. 'It was a bitter struggle, and the weariness is\par
slow to pass. I spoke no word to him, and in the end I wrenched the Stone to\par
my own will. That alone he will find hard to endure. And he beheld me. Yes,\par
Master Gimli, he saw me, but in other guise than you see me here. If that will\par
aid him, then I have done ill. But I do not think so. To know that I lived and\par
walked the earth was a blow to his heart, I deem; for he knew it not till now.\par
The eyes in Orthanc did not see through the armour of Th\'e9oden; but Sauron has\par
not forgotten Isildur and the sword of Elendil. Now in the very hour of his\par
great designs the heir of Isildur and the Sword are revealed; for I showed the\par
blade re-forged to him. He is not so mighty yet that he is above fear; nay,\par
doubt ever gnaws him.'\par
'But he wields great dominion, nonetheless,' said Gimli; 'and now he will\par
strike more swiftly.'\par
'The hasty stroke goes oft astray,' said Aragorn. 'We must press our\par
Enemy, and no longer wait upon him for the move. See my friends, when I had\par
mastered the Stone, I learned many things. A grave peril I saw coming\par
unlooked-for upon Gondor from the South that will draw off great strength from\par
the defence of Minas Tirith. If it is not countered swiftly, I deem that the\par
City will be lost ere ten days be gone.'\par
'Then lost it must be,' said Gimli. 'For what help is there to send\par
thither, and how could it come there in time?'\par
'I have no help to send, therefore I must go myself,' said Aragorn. 'But\par
there is only one way through the mountains that will bring me to the\par
coastlands before all is lost. That is the Paths of the Dead.'\par
'The Paths of the Dead!' said Gimli. 'It is a fell name; and little to\par
the liking to the Men of Rohan, as I saw. Can the living use such a road and\par
not perish? And even if you pass that way, what will so few avail to counter\par
the strokes of Mordor?'\par
'The living have never used that road since the coming of the Rohirrim,'\par
said Aragorn, 'for it is closed to them. But in this dark hour the heir of\par
Isildur may use it, if he dare. Listen! This is the word that the sons of\par
Elrond bring to me from their father in Rivendell, wisest in lore: _Bid\par
Aragorn remember the words of the seer, and the Paths of the Dead_.'\par
'And what may be the words of the seer?' said Legolas.\par
"Thus spoke Malbeth the Seer, in the days of Arvedui, last king at\par
Fornost,' said Aragorn:\par
Over the land there lies a long shadow,\par
westward reaching wings of darkness.\par
The Tower trembles; to the tombs of kings\par
doom approaches. The Dead awaken;\par
for the hour is come for the oathbreakers;\par
at the Stone of Erech they shall stand again\par
and hear there a horn in the hills ringing.\par
Whose shall the horn be? Who shall call them\par
from the prey twilight, the forgotten people?\par
The heir of him to whom the oath they swore.\par
From the North shall he come, need shall drive him:\par
he shall pass the Door to the Paths of the Dead.\par
'Dark ways doubtless, said Gimli, but no darker than these staves are to\par
me.'\par
'If you would understand them better, then I bid you come with me,' said\par
Aragorn; 'for that way I now shall take. But I do not go gladly; only need\par
drives me. Therefore, only of your free will would I have you come, for you\par
will find both toil and great fear, and maybe worse.'\par
'I will go with you even on the Paths of the Dead, and to whatever, end\par
they may lead,' said Gimli.\par
'I also will come,' said Legolas, 'for I do not fear the Dead.'\par
'I hope that the forgotten people will not have forgotten how to fight,'\par
said Gimli; 'for otherwise I see not why we should trouble them.'\par
'That we shall know if ever we come to Erech,' said Aragorn. 'But the\par
oath that they broke was to fight against Sauron, and they must fight\par
therefore, if they are to fulfil it. For at Erech there stands yet a black\par
stone that was brought, it was said, from N\'famenor by Isildur; and it was set\par
upon a hill, and upon it the King of the Mountains swore allegiance to him in\par
the beginning of the realm of Gondor. But when Sauron returned and grew in\par
might again, Isildur summoned the Men of the Mountains to fulfil their oath,\par
and they would not: for they had worshipped Sauron in the Dark Years.\par
'Then Isildur said to their king: "Thou shalt be the last king. And if\par
the West prove mightier than thy Black Master, this curse I lay upon thee and\par
thy folk: to rest never until your oath is fulfilled. For this war will last\par
through years uncounted, and you shall be summoned once again ere the end."\par
And they fled before the wrath of Isildur, and did not dare to go forth to war\par
on Sauron's part; and they hid themselves in secret places in the mountains\par
and had no dealings with other men, but slowly dwindled in the barren hills.\par
And the terror of the Sleepless Dead lies about the Hill of Erech and all\par
places where that people lingered. But that way I must go, since there are\par
none living to help me.'\par
He stood up. 'Come!' he cried, and drew his sword, and it flashed in the\par
twilit hall of the Burg. 'To the Stone of Erech! I seek the Paths of the Dead.\par
Come with me who will!'\par
Legolas and Gimli made no answer, but they rose and followed Aragorn from\par
the hall. On the green there waited, still and silent, the hooded Rangers.\par
Legolas and Gimli mounted. Aragorn sprang upon Roheryn. Then Halbarad lifted a\par
great horn, and the blast of it echoed in Helm's Deep; and with that they\par
leapt away, riding down the Coomb like thunder, while all the men that were\par
left on Dike or Burg stared in amaze.\par
And while Th\'e9oden went by slow paths in the hills, the Grey Company\par
passed swiftly over the plain, and on the next day in the afternoon they came\par
to Edoras; and there they halted only briefly, ere they passed up the valley,\par
and so came to Dunharrow as darkness fell.\par
The Lady \'c9owyn greeted them and was glad of their coming; for no mightier\par
men had she seen than the D\'fanedain and the fair sons of Elrond; but on Aragorn\par
most of all her eyes rested. And when they sat at supper with her, they talked\par
together, and she heard of all that had passed since Th\'e9oden rode away,\par
concerning which only hasty tidings had yet reached her; and when she heard of\par
the battle in Helm's Deep and the great slaughter of their foes, and of the\par
charge of Th\'e9oden and his knights, then her eyes shone.\par
But at last she said: 'Lords, you are weary and shall now go to your beds\par
with such ease as can be contrived in haste. But tomorrow fairer housing shall\par
be found for you.'\par
But Aragorn said: 'Nay, lady, be not troubled for us! If we may lie here\par
tonight and break our fast tomorrow, it will be enough. For I ride on an\par
errand most urgent, and with the first light of morning we must go.'\par
She smiled on him and said: 'Then it was kindly done, lord, to ride so\par
many miles out of your way to bring tidings to \'c9owyn, and to speak with her in\par
her exile.'\par
'Indeed no man would count such a journey wasted,' said Aragorn; 'and\par
yet, lady, I could not have come hither, if it were not that the road which I\par
must take leads me to Dunharrow.'\par
And she answered as one that likes not what is said: "Then, lord, you are\par
astray; for out of Harrowdale no road runs east or south; and you had best\par
return as you came.'\par
'Nay, lady,' said he, 'I am not astray; for I walked in this land ere you\par
were born to grace it. There is a road out of this valley, and that road I\par
shall take. Tomorrow I shall ride by the Paths of the Dead.'\par
Then she stared at him as one that is stricken, and her face blanched,\par
and for long she spoke no more, while all sat silent. 'But, Aragorn,' she said\par
at last, 'is it then your errand to seek death? For that is all that you will\par
find on that road. They do not suffer the living to pass.'\par
'They may suffer me to pass,' said Aragorn; 'but at the least I will\par
adventure it. No other road will serve.'\par
'But this is madness,' she said. 'For here are men of renown and prowess,\par
whom you should not take into the shadows, but should lead to war, where men\par
are needed. I beg you to remain and ride with my brother; for then all our\par
hearts will be gladdened, and our hope be the brighter.'\par
'It is not madness, lady,' he answered; 'for I go on a path appointed.\par
But those who follow me do so of their free will; and if they wish now to\par
remain and ride with the Rohirrim, they may do so. But I shall take the Paths\par
of the Dead, alone, if needs be.'\par
Then they said no more, and they ate in silence; but her eyes were ever\par
upon Aragorn, and the others saw that she was in great torment of mind. At\par
length they arose, and took their leave of the Lady, and thanked her for her\par
care, and went to their rest.\par
But as Aragorn came to the booth where he was to lodge with Legolas and\par
Gimli, and his companions had gone in. there came the Lady \'c9owyn after him and\par
called to him. He turned and saw her as a glimmer in the night, for she was\par
clad in white; but her eyes were on fire.\par
'Aragorn,' she said, 'why will you go on this deadly road?'\par
'Because I must,' he said. 'Only so can I see any hope of doing my part\par
in the war against Sauron. I do not choose paths of peril, \'c9owyn. Were I to go\par
where my heart dwells, far in the North I would now be wandering in the fair\par
valley of Rivendell.'\par
For a while she was silent, as if pondering what this might mean. Then\par
suddenly she laid her hand on his arm. 'You are a stern lord and resolute,'\par
she said; 'and thus do men win renown.' She paused. 'Lord.' she said, 'if you\par
must go, then let me ride in your following. For I am weary of skulking in the\par
hills, and wish to face peril and battle.'\par
'Your duty is with your people,' he answered.\par
'Too often have I heard of duty,' she cried. 'But am I not of the House\par
of Eorl, a shieldmaiden and not a dry-nurse? I have waited on faltering feet\par
long enough. Since they falter no longer, it seems, may I not now spend my\par
life as I will?'\par
'Few may do that with honour,' he answered. 'But as for you, lady: did\par
you not accept the charge to govern the people until their lord's return? If\par
you had not been chosen, then some marshal or captain would have been set in\par
the same place, and he could not ride away from his charge, were he weary of\par
it or no.'\par
'Shall I always be chosen?' she said bitterly. 'Shall I always be left\par
behind when the Riders depart, to mind the house while they win renown, and\par
find food and beds when they return?'\par
'A time may come soon,' said he, 'when none will return. Then there will\par
be need of valour without renown, for none shall remember the deeds that are\par
done in the last defence of your homes. Yet the deeds will not be less valiant\par
because they are unpraised.'\par
And she answered: 'All your words are but to say: you are a woman, and\par
your part is in the house. But when the men have died in battle and honour,\par
you have leave to be burned in the house, for the men will need it no more.\par
But I am of the House of Eorl and not a serving-woman. I can ride and wield\par
blade, and I do not fear either pain or death.'\par
'What do you fear, lady?' he asked.\par
'A cage,' she said. 'To stay behind bars, until use and old age accept\par
them, and all chance of doing great deeds is gone beyond recall or desire.'\par
'And yet you counselled me not to adventure on the road that I had\par
chosen, because it is perilous?'\par
'So may one counsel another,' she said. 'Yet I do not bid you flee from\par
peril, but to ride to battle where your sword may win renown and victory. I\par
would not see a thing that is high and excellent cast away needlessly.'\par
'Nor would I,' he said. 'Therefore I say to you, lady: Stay! For you have\par
no errand to the South.'\par
'Neither have those others who go with thee. They go only because they\par
would not be parted from thee \endash  because they love thee.' Then she turned and\par
vanished into the night.\par
When the light of day was come into the sky but the sun was not yet risen\par
above the high ridges in the East, Aragorn made ready to depart. His company\par
was all mounted, and he was about to leap into the saddle, when the Lady \'c9owyn\par
came to bid them farewell. She was clad as a Rider and girt with a sword. In\par
her hand she bore a cup, and she set it to her lips and drank a little,\par
wishing them good speed; and then she gave the cup to Aragorn, and he drank,\par
and he said: 'Farewell, Lady of Rohan! I drink to the fortunes of your House,\par
and of you, and of all your people. Say to your brother: beyond the shadows we\par
may meet again!'\par
Then it seemed to Gimli and Legolas who were nearby that she wept, and in\par
one so stern and proud that seemed the more grievous. But she said: 'Aragorn,\par
wilt thou go?'\par
'I will,' he said.\par
'Then wilt thou not let me ride with this company, as I have asked?'\par
'I will not, lady,' he said. 'For that I could not grant without leave of\par
the king and of your brother; and they will not return until tomorrow. But I\par
count now every hour, indeed every minute. Farewell!'\par
Then she fell on her knees, saying: 'I beg thee!'\par
'Nay, lady,' he said, and taking her by the hand he raised her. Then he\par
kissed her hand, and sprang into the saddle, and rode away, and did not look\par
back; and only those who knew him well and were near to him saw the pain that\par
he bore.\par
But \'c9owyn stood still as a figure carven in stone, her hands clenched at\par
her sides, and she watched them until they passed into the shadows under the\par
black Dwimorberg, the Haunted Mountain, in which was the Gate of the Dead.\par
When they were lost to view, she turned, stumbling as one that is blind, and\par
went back to her lodging. But none of her folk saw this parting, for they hid\par
themselves in fear and would not come forth until the day was up, and the\par
reckless strangers were gone.\par
And some said: 'They are Elvish wights. Let them go where they belong,\par
into the dark places, and never return. The times are evil enough.'\par
The light was still grey as they rode, for the sun had not yet climbed\par
over the black ridges of the Haunted Mountain before them. A dread fell on\par
them, even as they passed between the lines of ancient stones and so came to\par
the Dimholt. There under the gloom of black trees that not even Legolas could\par
long endure they found a hollow place opening at the mountain's root, and\par
right in their path stood a single mighty stone like a finger of doom.\par
'My blood runs chill,' said Gimli, but the others were silent, and his\par
voice fell dead on the dank fir-needles at his feet. The horses would not pass\par
the threatening stone, until the riders dismounted and led them about. And so\par
they came at last deep into the glen; and there stood a sheer wall of rock,\par
and in the wall the Dark Door gaped before them like the mouth of night. Signs\par
and figures were carved above its wide arch too dim to read, and fear flowed\par
from it like a grey vapour.\par
The company halted, and there was not a heart among them that did not\par
quail, unless it were the heart of Legolas of the Elves, for whom the ghosts\par
of Men have no terror.\par
'This is an evil door,' said Halbarad, 'and my death lies beyond it. I\par
will dare to pass it nonetheless; but no horse will enter.'\par
'But we must go in, and therefore the horses must go too,' said Aragorn.\par
'For if ever we come through this darkness, many leagues lie beyond, and every\par
hour that is lost there will bring the triumph of Sauron nearer. Follow me!'\par
Then Aragorn led the way, and such was the strength of his will in that\par
hour that all the D\'fanedain and their horses followed him. And indeed the love\par
that the horses of the Rangers bore for their riders was so great that they\par
were willing to face even the terror of the Door, if their masters' hearts\par
were steady as they walked beside them. But Arod, the horse of Rohan, refused\par
the way, and he stood sweating and trembling in a fear that was grievous to\par
see. Then Legolas laid his hands on his eyes and sang some words that went\par
soft in the gloom, until he suffered himself to be led, and Legolas passed in.\par
And there stood Gimli the Dwarf left all alone.\par
His knees shook, and he was wroth with himself. 'Here is a thing unheard\par
of!' he said. 'An Elf will go underground and a Dwarf dare not!' With that he\par
plunged in. But it seemed to him that he dragged his feet like lead over the\par
threshold; and at once a blindness came upon him, even upon Gimli Gl\'f3in's son\par
who had walked unafraid in many deep places of the world.\par
Aragorn had brought torches from Dunharrow, and now he went ahead bearing\par
one aloft; and Elladan with another went at the rear, and Gimli, stumbling\par
behind, strove to overtake him. He could see nothing but the dim flame of the\par
torches; but if the company halted, there seemed an endless whisper of voices\par
all about him, a murmur of words in no tongue that he had ever heard before.\par
Nothing assailed the company nor withstood their passage, and yet\par
steadily fear grew on the Dwarf as he went on: most of all because he knew now\par
that there could be no turning back; all the paths behind were thronged by an\par
unseen host that followed in the dark.\par
So time unreckoned passed, until Gimli saw a sight that he was ever\par
afterwards loth to recall. The road was wide, as far as he could judge, but\par
now the company came suddenly into a great empty space, and there were no\par
longer any walls upon either side. The dread was so heavy on him that he could\par
hardly walk. Away to the left something glittered in the gloom as Aragorn's\par
torch drew near. Then Aragorn halted and went to look what it might be.\par
'Does he feel no fear?' muttered the Dwarf. 'In any other cave Gimli\par
Gl\'f3in's son would have been the first to run to the gleam of gold. But not\par
here! Let it lie!'\par
Nonetheless he drew near, and saw Aragorn kneeling, while Elladan held\par
aloft both torches. Before him were the bones of a mighty man. He had been\par
clad in mail, and still his harness lay there whole; for the cavern's air was\par
as dry as dust, and his hauberk was gilded. His belt was of gold and garnets,\par
and rich with gold was the helm upon his bony head face downward on the floor.\par
He had fallen near the far wall of the cave, as now could be seen, and before\par
him stood a stony door closed fast: his finger-bones were still clawing at the\par
cracks. A notched and broken sword lay by him, as if he had hewn at the rock\par
in his last despair.\par
Aragorn did not touch him, but after gazing silently for a while he rose\par
and sighed. 'Hither shall the flowers of _simbelmyn\'eb_ come never unto world's\par
end,' he murmured. 'Nine mounds and seven there are now green with grass, and\par
through all the long years he has lain at the door that he could not unlock.\par
Whither does it lead? Why would he pass? None shall ever know!\par
'For that is not my errand!' he cried, turning back and speaking to the\par
whispering darkness behind. 'Keep your hoards and your secrets hidden in the\par
Accursed Years! Speed only we ask. Let us pass, and then come! I summon you to\par
the Stone of Erech!'\par
There was no answer, unless it were an utter silence more dreadful than\par
the whispers before; and then a chill blast came in which the torches\par
flickered and went out, and could not be rekindled. Of the time that followed,\par
one hour or many, Gimli remembered little. The others pressed on, but he was\par
ever hindmost, pursued by a groping horror that seemed always just about to\par
seize him; and a rumour came after him like the shadow-sound of many feet. He\par
stumbled on until he was crawling like a beast on the ground and felt that he\par
could endure no more: he must either find an ending and escape or run back in\par
madness to meet the following fear.\par
Suddenly he heard the tinkle of water, a sound hard and clear as a stone\par
falling into a dream of dark shadow. Light grew, and lo! the company passed\par
through another gateway, high-arched and broad, and a rill ran out beside\par
them; and beyond, going steeply down, was a road between sheer cliffs, knifeedged\par
against the sky far above. So deep and narrow was that chasm that the\par
sky was dark, and in it small stars glinted. Yet as Gimli after learned it was\par
still two hours ere sunset of the day on which they had set out from\par
Dunharrow; though for all that he could then tell it might have been twilight\par
in some later year, or in some other world.\par
The Company now mounted again, and Gimli returned to Legolas. They rode\par
in file, and evening came on and a deep blue dusk; and still fear pursued\par
them. Legolas turning to speak to Gimli looked back and the Dwarf saw before\par
his face the glitter in the Elf's bright eyes. Behind them rode Elladan, last\par
of the Company, but not the last of those that took the downward road.\par
'The Dead are following,' said Legolas. 'I see shapes of Men and of\par
horses, and pale banners like shreds of cloud, and spears like winter-thickets\par
on a misty night. The Dead are following.'\par
'Yes, the Dead ride behind. They have been summoned,' said Elladan.\par
The Company came at last out of the ravine, as suddenly as it they had\par
issued from a crack in a wall; and there lay the uplands of a great vale\par
before them, and the stream beside them went down with a cold voice over many\par
falls.\par
'Where in Middle-earth are we?' said Gimli; and Elladan answered: 'We\par
have descended from the uprising of the Morthond, the long chill river that\par
flows at last to the sea that washes the walls of Dol Amroth. You will not\par
need to ask hereafter how comes its name: Blackroot men call it.'\par
The Morthond Vale made a great bay that beat up against the sheer\par
southern faces of the mountains. Its steep slopes were grass-grown; but all\par
was grey in that hour, for the sun had gone, and far below lights twinkled in\par
the homes of Men. The vale was rich and many folk dwelt there.\par
Then without turning Aragorn cried aloud so that all could hear:\par
'Friends, forget your weariness! Ride now, ride! We must come to the Stone of\par
Erech ere this day passes, and long still is the way.' So without looking back\par
they rode the mountain-fields, until they came to a bridge over the growing\par
torrent and found a road that went down into the land.\par
Lights went out in house and hamlet as they came, and doors were shut,\par
and folk that were afield cried in terror and ran wild like hunted deer. Ever\par
there rose the same cry in the gathering night: 'The King of the Dead! The\par
King of the Dead is come upon us!'\par
Bells were ringing far below, and all men fled before the face of\par
Aragorn; but the Grey Company in their haste rode like hunters, until their\par
horses were stumbling with weariness. And thus, just ere midnight, and in a\par
darkness as black as the caverns in the mountains, they came at last to the\par
Hill of Erech.\par
Long had the terror of the Dead lain upon that hill and upon the empty\par
fields about it. For upon the top stood a black stone, round as a great globe,\par
the height of a man, though its half was buried in the ground. Unearthly it\par
looked, as though it had fallen from the sky, as some believed; but those who\par
remembered still the lore of Westernesse told that it had been brought out of\par
the ruin of N\'famenor and there set by Isildur at his landing. None of the\par
people of the valley dared to approach it, nor would they dwell near; for they\par
said that it was a trysting-place of the Shadow-men, and there they would\par
gather in times of fear, thronging round the Stone and whispering.\par
To that Stone the Company came and halted in the dead of night. Then\par
Elrohir gave to Aragorn a silver horn, and he blew upon it and it seemed to\par
those that stood near that they heard a sound of answering horns, as if it was\par
an echo in deep caves far away. No other sound they heard, and yet they were\par
aware of a great host gathered all about the hill on which they stood; and a\par
chill wind like the breath of ghosts came down from the mountains. But Aragorn\par
dismounted, and standing by the Stone he cried in a great voice:\par
'Oathbreakers, why have ye come?'\par
And a voice was heard out of the night that answered him, as if from far\par
away:\par
'To fulfil our oath and have peace.'\par
Then Aragorn said: 'The hour is come at last. Now I go to Pelargir upon\par
Anduin, and ye shall come after me. And when all this land is clean of the\par
servants of Sauron, I will hold the oath fulfilled, and ye shall have peace\par
and depart for ever. For I am Elessar, Isildur's heir of Gondor.'\par
And with that he bade Halbarad unfurl the great standard which he had\par
brought; and behold! it was black, and if there was any device upon it, it was\par
hidden in the darkness. Then there was silence, and not a whisper nor a sigh\par
was heard again all the long night. The Company camped beside the Stone, but\par
they slept little, because of the dread of the Shadows that hedged them round.\par
But when the dawn came, cold and pale, Aragorn rose at once, and he led\par
the Company forth upon the journey of greatest haste and weariness that any\par
among them had known, save he alone, and only his will held them to go on. No\par
other mortal Men could have endured it, none but the D\'fanedain of the North,\par
and with them Gimli the Dwarf and Legolas of the Elves.\par
They passed Tarlang's Neck and came into Lamedon; and the Shadow Host\par
pressed behind and fear went on before them, until they came to Calembel upon\par
Ciril, and the sun went down like blood behind Pinnath Gelin away in the West\par
behind them. The township and the fords of Ciril they found deserted, for many\par
men had gone away to war, and all that were left fled to the hills at the\par
rumour of the coming of the King of the Dead. But the next day there came no\par
dawn, and the Grey Company passed on into the darkness of the Storm of Mordor\par
and were lost to mortal sight; but the Dead followed them.\par
_Chapter 3_\par
The Muster of Rohan\par
Now all roads were running together to the East to meet the coming of war\par
and the onset of the Shadow. And even as Pippin stood at the Great Gate of the\par
City and saw the Prince of Dol Amroth ride in with his banners, the King of\par
Rohan came down out of the hills.\par
Day was waning. In the last rays of the sun the Riders cast long pointed\par
shadows that went on before them. Darkness had already crept beneath the\par
murmuring fir-woods that clothed the steep mountain-sides. The king rode now\par
slowly at the end of the day. Presently the path turned round a huge bare\par
shoulder of rock and plunged into the gloom of soft-sighing trees. Down, down\par
they went in a long winding file. When at last they came to the bottom of the\par
gorge they found that evening had fallen in the deep places. The sun was gone.\par
Twilight lay upon the waterfalls.\par
All day far below them a leaping stream had run down from the high pass\par
behind, cleaving its narrow way between pine-clad walls; and now through a\par
stony gate it flowed out and passed into a wider vale. The Riders followed it,\par
and suddenly Harrowdale lay before them, loud with the noise of waters in the\par
evening. There the white Snowbourn, joined by the lesser stream, went rushing,\par
fuming on the stones, down to Edoras and the green hills and the plains. Away\par
to the right at the head of the great dale the mighty Starkhorn loomed up\par
above its vast buttresses swathed in cloud; but its jagged peak, clothed in\par
everlasting snow, gleamed far above the world, blue-shadowed upon the East,\par
red-stained by the sunset in the West.\par
Merry looked out in wonder upon this strange country, of which he had\par
heard many tales upon their long road. It was a skyless world, in which his\par
eye; through dim gulfs of shadowy air, saw only ever-mounting slopes, great\par
walls of stone behind great walls, and frowning precipices wreathed with mist.\par
He sat for a moment half dreaming, listening to the noise of water, the\par
whisper of dark trees, the crack of stone, and the vast waiting silence that\par
brooded behind all sound. He loved mountains, or he had loved the thought of\par
them marching on the edge of stories brought from far away; but now he was\par
borne down by the insupportable weight of Middle-earth. He longed to shut out\par
the immensity in a quiet room by a fire.\par
He was very tired, for though they had ridden slowly, they had ridden\par
with very little rest. Hour after hour for nearly three weary days he had\par
jogged up and down, over passes, and through long dales, and across many\par
streams. Sometimes where the way was broader he had ridden at the king's side,\par
not noticing that many of the Riders smiled to see the two together: the\par
hobbit on his little shaggy grey pony, and the Lord of Rohan on his great\par
white horse. Then he had talked to Th\'e9oden, telling him about his home and the\par
doings of the Shire-folk, or listening in turn to tales of the Mark and its\par
mighty men of old. But most of the time, especially on this last day, Merry\par
had ridden by himself just behind the king, saying nothing, and trying to\par
understand the slow sonorous speech of Rohan that he heard the men behind him\par
using. It was a language in which there seemed to be many words that he knew,\par
though spoken more richly and strongly than in the Shire, yet he could not\par
piece the words together. At times some Rider would lift up his clear voice in\par
stirring song, and Merry felt his heart leap, though he did not know what it\par
was about.\par
All the same he had been lonely, and never more so than now at the day's\par
end. He wondered where in all this strange world Pippin had got to; and what\par
would become of Aragorn and Legolas and Gimli. Then suddenly like a cold touch\par
on his heart he thought of Frodo and Sam. 'I am forgetting them!' he said to\par
himself reproachfully. 'And yet they are more important than all the rest of\par
us. And I came to help them; but now they must be hundreds of miles away, if\par
they are still alive.' He shivered.\par
'Harrowdale at last!' said \'c9omer. 'Our journey is almost at an end.' They\par
halted. The paths out of the narrow gorge fell steeply. Only a glimpse, as\par
through a tall window, could be seen of the great valley in the gloaming\par
below. A single small light could be seen twinkling by the river.\par
'This journey is over, maybe,' said Th\'e9oden, 'but I have far yet to go.\par
Last night the moon was full, and in the morning I shall ride to Edoras to the\par
gathering of the Mark.'\par
'But if you would take my counsel,' said \'c9omer in a low voice, 'you would\par
then return hither, until the war is over, lost or won.'\par
Th\'e9oden smiled. 'Nay, my son, for so I will call you, speak not the soft\par
words of Wormtongue in my old ears!' He drew himself up and looked back at the\par
long line of his men fading into the dusk behind. 'Long years in the space of\par
days it seems since I rode west; but never will I lean on a staff again. If\par
the war is lost, what good will be my hiding in the hills? And if it is won,\par
what grief will it be, even if I fall, spending my last strength? But we will\par
leave this now. Tonight I will lie in the Hold of Dunharrow. One evening of\par
peace at least is left us. Let us ride on!'\par
In the deepening dusk they came down into the valley. Here the Snowbourn\par
flowed near to the western walls of the dale, and soon the path led them to a\par
ford where the shallow waters murmured loudly on the stones. The ford was\par
guarded. As the king approached many men sprang up out of the shadow of the\par
rocks; and when they saw the king they cried with glad voices: 'Th\'e9oden King!\par
Th\'e9oden King! The King of the Mark returns!'\par
Then one blew a long call on a horn. It echoed in the valley. Other horns\par
answered it, and lights shone out across the river.\par
And suddenly there rose a great chorus of trumpets from high above,\par
sounding from some hollow place, as it seemed, that gathered their notes into\par
one voice and sent it rolling and beating on the walls of stone.\par
So the King of the Mark came back victorious out of the West to Dunharrow\par
beneath the feet of the White Mountains. There he found the remaining strength\par
of his people already assembled; for as soon as his coming was known captains\par
rode to meet him at the ford, bearing messages from Gandalf. D\'fanhere,\par
chieftain of the folk of Harrowdale, was at their head.\par
'At dawn three days ago, lord,' he said. 'Shadowfax came like a wind out\par
of the West to Edoras, and Gandalf brought tidings of your victory to gladden\par
our hearts. But he brought also word from you to hasten the gathering of the\par
Riders. And then came the winged Shadow.'\par
'The winged Shadow?' said Th\'e9oden. 'We saw it also, but that was in the\par
dead of night before Gandalf left us.'\par
'Maybe, lord,' said D\'fanhere. 'Yet the same, or another like to it, a\par
flying darkness in the shape of a monstrous bird, passed over Edoras that\par
morning, and all men were shaken with fear. For it stooped upon Meduseld, and\par
as it came low, almost to the gable, there came a cry that stopped our hearts.\par
Then it was that Gandalf counselled us not to assemble in the fields, but to\par
meet you here in the valley under the mountains. And he bade us to kindle no\par
more lights or fires than barest need asked. So it has been done. Gandalf\par
spoke with great authority. We trust that it is as you would wish. Naught has\par
been seen in Harrowdale of these evil things.'\par
'It is well,' said Th\'e9oden. 'I will ride now to the Hold, and there\par
before I go to rest I will meet the marshals and captains. Let them come to me\par
as soon as may be!'\par
The road now led eastward straight across the valley, which was at that\par
point little more than half a mile in width. Flats and meads of rough grass,\par
grey now in the falling night, lay all about, but in front on the far side of\par
the dale Merry saw a frowning wall, a last outlier of the great roots of the\par
Starkhorn, cloven by the river in ages past.\par
On all the level spaces there was great concourse of men. Some thronged\par
to the roadside, hailing the king and the riders from the West with glad\par
cries; but stretching away into the distance behind there were ordered rows of\par
tents and booths, and lines of picketed horses, and great store of arms, and\par
piled spears bristling like thickets of new-planted trees. Now all the great\par
assembly was falling into shadow, and yet, though the night-chill blew cold\par
from the heights no lanterns glowed, no fires were lit. Watchmen heavily\par
cloaked paced to and fro.\par
Merry wondered how many Riders there were. He could not guess their\par
number in the gathering gloom, but it looked to him like a great army, many\par
thousands strong. While he was peering from side to side the king's party came\par
up under the looming cliff on the eastern side of the valley; and there\par
suddenly the path began to climb, and Merry looked up in amazement. He was on\par
a road the like of which he had never seen before, a great work of men's hands\par
in years beyond the reach of song. Upwards it wound, coiling like a snake,\par
boring its way across the sheer slope of rock. Steep as a stair, it looped\par
backwards and forwards as it climbed. Up it horses could walk, and wains could\par
be slowly hauled; but no enemy could come that way, except out of the air, if\par
it was defended from above. At each turn of the road there were great standing\par
stones that had been carved in the likeness of men, huge and clumsy-limbed,\par
squatting cross-legged with their stumpy arms folded on fat bellies. Some in\par
the wearing of the years had lost all features save the dark holes of their\par
eyes that still stared sadly at the passers-by. The Riders hardly glanced at\par
them. The P\'fakel-men they called them, and heeded them little: no power or\par
terror was left in them; but Merry gazed at them with wonder and a feeling\par
almost of pity, as they loomed up mournfully in the dusk.\par
After a while he looked back and found that he had already climbed some\par
hundreds of feet above the valley, but still far below he could dimly see a\par
winding line of Riders crossing the ford and filing along the road towards the\par
camp prepared for them. Only the king and his guard were going up into the\par
Hold.\par
At last the king's company came to a sharp brink, and the climbing road\par
passed into a cutting between walls of rock, and so went up a short slope and\par
out on to a wide upland. The Firienfeld men called it, a green mountain-field\par
of grass and heath, high above the deep-delved courses of the Snowbourn, laid\par
upon the lap of the great mountains behind: the Starkhorn southwards, and\par
northwards the saw-toothed mass of Irensaga, between which there faced the\par
riders, the grim black wall of the Dwimorberg, the Haunted Mountain rising out\par
of steep slopes of sombre pines. Dividing the upland into two there marched a\par
double line of unshaped standing stones that dwindled into the dusk and\par
vanished in the trees. Those who dared to follow that road came soon to the\par
black Dimholt under Dwimorberg, and the menace of the pillar of stone, and the\par
yawning shadow of the forbidden door.\par
Such was the dark Dunharrow, the work of long-forgotten men. Their name\par
was lost and no song or legend remembered it. For what purpose they had made\par
this place, as a town or secret temple or a tomb of kings, none could say.\par
Here they laboured in the Dark Years, before ever a ship came to the western\par
shores, or Gondor of the D\'fanedain was built; and now they had vanished, and\par
only the old P\'fakel-men were left, still sitting at the turnings of the road.\par
Merry stared at the lines of marching stones: they were worn and black;\par
some were leaning, some were fallen, some cracked or broken; they looked like\par
rows of old and hungry teeth. He wondered what they could be, and he hoped\par
that the king was not going to follow them into the darkness beyond. Then he\par
saw that there were clusters of tents and booths on either side of the stony\par
way; but these were not set near the trees, and seemed rather to huddle away\par
from them towards the brink of the cliff. The greater number were on the\par
right, where the Firienfeld was wider; and on the left there was a smaller\par
camp, in the midst of which stood a tall pavilion. From this side a rider now\par
came out to meet them, and they turned from the road.\par
As they drew near Merry saw that the rider was a woman with long braided\par
hair gleaming in the twilight, yet she wore a helm and was clad to the waist\par
like a warrior and girded with a sword.\par
'Hail, Lord of the Mark!' she cried. 'My heart is glad at your\par
returning.'\par
'And you, \'c9owyn,' said Th\'e9oden, 'is all well with you?'\par
'All is well,' she answered; yet it seemed to Merry that her voice belied\par
her, and he would have thought that she had been weeping, if that could be\par
believed of one so stern of face. 'All is well. It was a weary road for the\par
people to take, torn suddenly from their homes. There were hard words, for it\par
is long since war has driven us from the green fields; but there have been no\par
evil deeds. All is now ordered, as you see. And your lodging is prepared for\par
you; for I have had full tidings of you and knew the hour of your coming.'\par
'So Aragorn has come then,' said \'c9omer. 'Is he still here?'\par
'No, he is gone,' said \'c9owyn turning away and looking at the mountains\par
dark against the East and South.\par
'Whither did he go?' asked \'c9omer.\par
'I do not know,' she answered. 'He came at night, and rode away\par
yestermorn, ere the Sun had climbed over the mountain-tops. He is gone.'\par
'You are grieved, daughter,' said Th\'e9oden. 'What has happened? Tell me,\par
did he speak of that road?' He pointed away along the darkening lines of\par
stones towards the Dwimorberg. 'Of the Paths of the Dead?'\par
'Yes, lord,' said \'c9owyn. 'And he has passed into the shadows from which\par
none have returned. I could not dissuade him. He is gone.'\par
'Then our paths are sundered,' said \'c9omer. 'He is lost. We must ride\par
without him, and our hope dwindles.'\par
Slowly they passed through the short heath and upland grass, speaking no\par
more, until they came to the king's pavilion. There Merry found that\par
everything was made ready, and that he himself was not forgotten. A little\par
tent had been pitched for him beside the king's lodging; and there he sat\par
alone, while men passed to and fro, going in to the king and taking counsel\par
with him. Night came on, and the half-seen heads of the mountains westward\par
were crowned with stars, but the East was dark and blank. The marching stones\par
faded slowly from sight, but still beyond them, blacker than the gloom,\par
brooded the vast crouching shadow of the Dwimorberg.\par
'The Paths of the Dead,' he muttered to himself. 'The Paths of the Dead?\par
What does all this mean? They have all left me now. They have all gone to some\par
doom: Gandalf and Pippin to war in the East; and Sam and Frodo to Mordor; and\par
Strider and Legolas and Gimli to the Paths of the Dead. But my turn will come\par
soon enough, I suppose. I wonder what they are all talking about, and what the\par
king means to do. For I must go where he goes now.'\par
In the midst of these gloomy thoughts he suddenly remembered that he was\par
very hungry, and he got up to go and see if anyone else in this strange camp\par
felt the same. But at that very moment a trumpet sounded, and a man came\par
summoning him, the king's esquire, to wait at the king's board.\par
In the inner part of the pavilion was a small space, curtained off with\par
broidered hangings, and strewn with skins: and there at a small table sat\par
Th\'e9oden with \'c9omer and \'c9owyn, and D\'fanhere, lord of Harrowdale. Merry stood\par
beside the king's stool and waited on him till presently the old man, coming\par
out of deep thought, turned to him and smiled.\par
'Come, Master Meriadoc!' he said. 'You shall not stand. You shall sit\par
beside me, as long as I remain in my own lands, and lighten my heart with\par
tales.'\par
Room was made for the hobbit at the king's left hand, but no one called\par
for any tale. There was indeed little speech, and they ate and drank for the\par
most part in silence, until at last, plucking up courage, Merry asked the\par
question that was tormenting him.\par
'Twice now, lord, I have heard of the Paths of the Dead,' he said. 'What\par
are they? And where has Strider, I mean the Lord Aragorn where has he gone?'\par
The king sighed, but no one answered, until at last \'c9omer spoke. 'We do\par
not know, and our hearts are heavy,' he said. 'But as for the Paths of the\par
Dead, you have yourself walked on their first steps. Nay. I speak no words of\par
ill omen! The road that we have climbed is the approach to the Door, yonder in\par
the Dimholt. But what lies beyond no man knows.'\par
'No man knows,' said Th\'e9oden: 'yet ancient legend, now seldom spoken, has\par
somewhat to report. If these old tales speak true that have come down from\par
father to son in the House of Eorl, then the Door under Dwimorberg leads to a\par
secret way that goes beneath the mountain to some forgotten end. But none have\par
ever ventured in to search its secrets, since Baldor, son of Brego, passed the\par
Door and was never seen among men again. A rash vow he spoke, as he drained\par
the horn at that feast which Brego made to hallow new-built Meduseld, and he\par
came never to the high seat of which he was the heir.\par
'Folk say that Dead Men out of the Dark Years guard the way and will\par
suffer no living man to come to their hidden halls; but at whiles they may\par
themselves be seen passing out of the door like shadows and down the stony\par
road. Then the people of Harrowdale shut fast their doors and shroud their\par
windows and are afraid. But the Dead come seldom forth and only at times of\par
great unquiet and coming death.'\par
'Yet it is said in Harrowdale,' said \'c9owyn in a low voice. 'that in the\par
moonless nights but little while ago a great host in strange array passed by.\par
Whence they came none knew, but they went up the stony road and vanished into\par
the hill, as if they went to keep a tryst.'\par
'Then why has Aragorn gone that way?' asked Merry. 'Don't you know\par
anything that would explain it?'\par
'Unless he has spoken words to you as his friend that we have not\par
heard,' said \'c9omer, 'none now in the land of the living can tell his purpose.'\par
'Greatly changed he seemed to me since I saw him first in the king's\par
house,' said \'c9owyn: 'grimmer, older. Fey I thought him, and like one whom the\par
Dead call.'\par
'Maybe he was called,' said Th\'e9oden; 'and my heart tells me that I shall\par
not see him again. Yet he is a kingly man of high destiny. And take comfort in\par
this, daughter, since comfort you seem to need in your grief for this guest.\par
It is said that when the Eorlingas came out of the North and passed at length\par
up the Snowbourn, seeking strong places of refuge in time of need, Brego and\par
his son Baldor climbed the Stair of the Hold and so came before the Door. On\par
the threshold sat an old man, aged beyond guess of years; tall and kingly he\par
had been, but now he was withered as an old stone. Indeed for stone they took\par
him, for he moved not, and he said no word, until they sought to pass him by\par
and enter. And then a voice came out of him, as it were out of the ground, and\par
to their amaze it spoke in the western tongue: _The way is shut_.\par
'Then they halted and looked at him and saw that he lived still; but he\par
did not look at them. _The way is shut_, his voice said again _It was made by\par
those who are Dead, and the Dead keep it, until the time comes. The way is\par
shut._\par
'_And when will that time be?_said Baldor. But no answer did he ever get.\par
For the old man died in that hour and fell upon his face; and no other tidings\par
of the ancient dwellers in the mountains have our folk ever learned. Yet maybe\par
at last the time foretold has come, and Aragorn may pass.'\par
'But how shall a man discover whether that time be come or no, save by\par
daring the Door?' said \'c9omer. 'And that way I would not go though all the\par
hosts of Mordor stood before me, and I were alone and had no other refuge.\par
Alas that a fey mood should fall on a man so greathearted in this hour of\par
need! Are there not evil things enough abroad without seeking them under the\par
earth? War is at hand.'\par
He paused, for at that moment there was a noise outside, a man's voice\par
crying the name of Th\'e9oden, and the challenge of the guard.\par
Presently the captain of the Guard thrust aside the curtain. 'A man is\par
here, lord,' he said, 'an errand-rider of Gondor. He wishes to come before you\par
at once.'\par
'Let him come!' said Th\'e9oden.\par
A tall man entered, and Merry choked back a cry; for a moment it seemed\par
to him that Boromir was alive again and had returned. Then he saw that it was\par
not so; the man was a stranger, though as like to Boromir as if he were one of\par
his kin, tall and grey-eyed and proud. He was clad as a rider with a cloak of\par
dark green over a coat of fine mail; on the front of his helm was wrought a\par
small silver star. In his hand he bore a single arrow, black-feathered and\par
barbed with steel, but the point was painted red.\par
He sank on one knee and presented the arrow to Th\'e9oden. 'Hail Lord of the\par
Rohirrim, friend of Gondor!' he said. 'Hirgon I am, errand-rider of Denethor,\par
who bring you this token of war. Gondor is in great need. Often the Rohirrim\par
have aided us, but now the Lord Denethor asks for all your strength and all\par
your speed; lest Gondor fall at last.'\par
'The Red Arrow!' said Th\'e9oden, holding it, as one who receives a summons\par
long expected and yet dreadful when it comes. His hand trembled. 'The Red\par
Arrow has not been seen in the Mark in all my years! Has it indeed come to\par
that? And what does the Lord Denethor reckon that all my strength and all my\par
speed may be?'\par
'That is best known to yourself, lord,' said Hirgon. 'But ere long it may\par
well come to pass that Minas Tirith is surrounded, and unless you have the\par
strength to break a siege of many powers, the Lord Denethor bids me say that\par
he judges that the strong arms of the Rohirrim would be better within his\par
walls than without.'\par
'But he knows that we are a people who fight rather upon horseback and in\par
the open, and that we are also a scattered people and time is needed for the\par
gathering of our Riders. Is it not true, Hirgon, that the Lord of Minas Tirith\par
knows more than he sets in his message? For we are already at war, as you may\par
have seen, and you do not find us all unprepared. Gandalf the Grey has been\par
among us, and even now we are mustering for battle in the East.'\par
'What the Lord Denethor may know or guess of all these things I cannot\par
say,' answered Hirgon. 'But indeed our case is desperate. My lord does not\par
issue any command to you, he begs you only to remember old friendship and\par
oaths long spoken, and for your own good to do all that you may. It is\par
reported to us that many kings have ridden in from the East to the service of\par
Mordor. From the North to the field of Dagorlad there is skirmish and rumour\par
of war. In the South the Haradrim are moving, and fear has fallen on all our\par
coastlands, so that little help will come to us thence. Make haste! For it is\par
before the walls of Minas Tirith that the doom of our time will be decided,\par
and if the tide be not stemmed there, then it will flow over all the fair\par
fields of Rohan, and even in this Hold among the hills there shall be no\par
refuge.'\par
'Dark tidings,' said Th\'e9oden, 'yet not all unguessed. But say to Denethor\par
that even if Rohan itself felt no peril, still we would come to his aid. But\par
we have suffered much loss in our battles with Saruman the traitor, and we\par
must still think of our frontier to the north and east, as his own tidings\par
make clear. So great a power as the Dark Lord seems now to wield might well\par
contain us in battle before the City and yet strike with great force across\par
the River away beyond the Gate of Kings.\par
'But we will speak no longer counsels of prudence. We will come. The\par
weapontake was set for the morrow. When all is ordered we will set out. Ten\par
thousand spears I might have sent riding over the plain to the dismay of your\par
foes. It will be less now, I fear; for I will not leave my strongholds all\par
unguarded. Yet six thousands at the least shall ride behind me. For say to\par
Denethor that in this hour the King of the Mark himself will come down to the\par
land of Gondor, though maybe he will not ride back. But it is a long road, and\par
man and beast must reach the end with strength to fight. A week it may be from\par
tomorrow's morn ere you hear the cry of the Sons of Eorl coming from the\par
North.\par
'A week!' said Hirgon. 'If it must be so, it must. But you are like to\par
find only ruined walls in seven days from now, unless other help unlooked-for\par
comes. Still, you may at the least disturb the Orcs and Swarthy Men from their\par
feasting in the White Tower.'\par
'At the least we will do that,' said Th\'e9oden. 'But I myself am new-come\par
from battle and long journey, and I will now go to rest. Tarry here this\par
night. Then you shall look on the muster of Rohan and ride away the gladder\par
for the sight, and the swifter for the rest. In the morning counsels are best,\par
and night changes many thoughts.\par
With that the king stood up, and they all rose. 'Go now each to your\par
rest.' he said, 'and sleep well. And you, Master Meriadoc, I need no more\par
tonight. But be ready to my call as soon as the Sun is risen.'\par
'I will be ready,' said Merry, 'even if you bid me ride with you on the\par
Paths of the Dead.'\par
'Speak not words of omen!' said the king. 'For there may be more roads\par
than one that could bear that name. But I did not say that I would bid you\par
ride with me on any road. Good night!'\par
'I won't be left behind, to be called for on return!' said Merry. 'I\par
won't be left, I won't.' And repeating this over and over again to himself he\par
fell asleep at last in his tent.\par
He was wakened by a man shaking him. 'Wake up, wake up. Master\par
Holbytla!' he cried; and at length Merry came out of deep dreams and sat up\par
with a start. It still seemed very dark, he thought.\par
'What is the matter?' he asked.\par
'The king calls for you.'\par
'But the Sun has not risen, yet,' said Merry.\par
'No, and will not rise today, Master Holbytla. Nor ever again, one would\par
think under this cloud. But time does not stand still, though the Sun be lost.\par
Make haste!'\par
Flinging on some clothes, Merry looked outside. The world was darkling.\par
The very air seemed brown, and all things about were black and grey and\par
shadowless; there was a great stillness. No shape of cloud could be seen,\par
unless it were far away westward, where the furthest groping fingers of the\par
great gloom still crawled onwards and a little light leaked through them.\par
Overhead there hung a heavy roof, sombre and featureless, and light seemed\par
rather to be failing than growing.\par
Merry saw many folk standing, looking up and muttering: all their faces\par
were grey and sad, and some were afraid. With a sinking heart he made his way\par
to the king. Hirgon the rider of Gondor was there before him, and beside him\par
stood now another man, like him and dressed alike, but shorter and broader. As\par
Merry entered he was speaking to the king.\par
'It comes from Mordor, lord,' he said. 'It began last night at sunset.\par
From the hills in the Eastfold of your realm I saw it rise and creep across\par
the sky, and all night as I rode it came behind eating up the stars. Now the\par
great cloud hangs over all the land between here and the Mountains of Shadow;\par
and it is deepening. War has already begun.'\par
For a while the king sat silent. At last he spoke. 'So we come to it in\par
the end,' he said: 'the great battle of our time, in which many things shall\par
pass away. But at least there is no longer need for hiding. We will ride the\par
straight way and the open road and with all our speed. The muster shall begin\par
at once, and wait for none that tarry. Have you good store in Minas Tirith?\par
For if we must ride now in all haste, then we must ride light, with but meal\par
and water enough to last us into battle.'\par
'We have very great store long prepared,' answered Hirgon. Ride now as\par
light and as swift as you may!'\par
'Then call the heralds, \'c9omer,' said Th\'e9oden. 'Let the Riders be\par
marshalled!'\par
\'c9omer went out, and presently the trumpets rang in the Hold and were\par
answered by many others from below; but their voices no longer sounded clear\par
and brave as they had seemed to Merry the night before. Dull they seemed and\par
harsh in the heavy air, braying ominously.\par
The king turned to Merry. 'I am going to war, Master Meriadoc,' he said.\par
'In a little while I shall take the road. I release you from my service, but\par
not from my friendship. You shall abide here, and if you will, you shall serve\par
the Lady \'c9owyn, who will govern the folk in my stead.'\par
'But, but, lord,' Merry stammered, 'I offered you my sword. I do not want\par
to be parted from you like this, Th\'e9oden King. And as all my friends have gone\par
to the battle' I should be ashamed to stay behind.'\par
'But we ride on horses tall and swift,' said Th\'e9oden; 'and great though\par
your heart be, you cannot ride on such beasts.'\par
'Then tie me on to the back of one, or let me hang on a stirrup, or\par
something,' said Merry. 'It is a long way to run; but run I shall, if I cannot\par
ride, even if I wear my feet off and arrive weeks too late.'\par
Th\'e9oden smiled. 'Rather than that I would bear you with me on Snowmane,'\par
he said. 'But at the least you shall ride with me to Edoras and look on\par
Meduseld; for that way I shall go. So far Stybba can bear you: the great race\par
will not begin till we reach the plains.'\par
Then \'c9owyn rose up. 'Come now, Meriadoc!' she said. 'I will show you the\par
gear that I have prepared fur you.' They went out together. 'This request only\par
did Aragorn make to me,' said \'c9owyn, as they passed among the tents, 'that you\par
should be armed for battle. I have granted it, as I could. For my heart tells\par
me that you will need such gear ere the end.'\par
Now she led Merry to a booth among the lodges of the king's guard and\par
there an armourer brought out to her a small helm, and a round shield, and\par
other gear.\par
'No mail have we to fit you,' said \'c9owyn, 'nor any time for the forging\par
of such a hauberk; but here is also a stout jerkin of leather, a belt, and a\par
knife. A sword you have.'\par
Merry bowed, and the lady showed him the shield, which was like the\par
shield that had been given to Gimli, and it bore on it the device of the white\par
horse. 'Take all these things,' she said, 'and bear them to good fortune!\par
Farewell now, Master Meriadoc! Yet maybe we shall meet again, you and I.'\par
So it was that amid a gathering gloom the King of the Mark made ready to\par
lead all his Riders on the eastward road. Hearts were heavy and many quailed\par
in the shadow. But they were a stern people, loyal to their lord, and little\par
weeping or murmuring was heard, even in the camp in the Hold where the exiles\par
from Edoras were housed, women and children and old men. Doom hung over them,\par
but they faced it silently.\par
Two swift hours passed, and now the king sat upon his white horse,\par
glimmering in the half light. Proud and tall he seemed, though the hair that\par
flowed beneath his high helm was like snow; and many marvelled at him and took\par
heart to see him unbent and unafraid.\par
There on the wide flats beside the noisy river were marshalled in many\par
companies well nigh five and fifty hundreds of Riders fully armed, and many\par
hundreds of other men with spare horses lightly burdened. A single trumpet\par
sounded. The king raised his hand, and then silently the host of the Mark\par
began to move. Foremost went twelve of the king's household-men, Riders of\par
renown. Then the king followed with \'c9omer on his right. He had said farewell\par
to \'c9owyn above in the Hold, and the memory was grievous; but now he turned his\par
mind to the road that lay ahead. Behind him Merry rode on Stybba with the\par
errand riders of Gondor, and behind them again twelve more of the king's\par
household. They passed down the long ranks of waiting men with stern and\par
unmoved faces. But when they had come almost to the end of the line one looked\par
up glancing keenly at the hobbit. A young man, Merry thought as he returned\par
the glance, less in height and girth than most. He caught the glint of clear\par
grey eyes; and then he shivered, for it came suddenly to him that it was the\par
face of one without hope who goes in search of death.\par
On down the grey road they went beside the Snowbourn rushing on its\par
stones; through the hamlets of Underharrow and Upbourn, where many sad faces\par
of women looked out from dark doors; and so without horn or harp or music of\par
men's voices the great ride into the East began with which the songs of Rohan\par
were busy for many long lives of men thereafter.\par
From dark Dunharrow in the dim morning\par
with thane and captain rode Thengel's son:\par
to Edoras he came, the ancient halls\par
of the Mark-wardens mist-enshrouded;\par
golden timbers were in gloom mantled.\par
Farewell he bade to his free people,\par
hearth and high-seat, and the hallowed places,\par
where long he had feasted ere the light faded.\par
Forth rode the king, fear behind him,\par
fate before him. Fealty kept he;\par
oaths he had taken, all fulfilled them.\par
Forth rode Th\'e9oden. Five nights and days\par
east and onward rode the Eorlingas\par
through Folde and Fenmarch and the Firienwood,\par
six thousand spears to Sunlending,\par
Mundburg the mighty under Mindolluin,\par
Sea-kings' city in the South-kingdom\par
foe-beleaguered, fire-encircled.\par
Doom drove them on. Darkness took them,\par
Horse and horseman; hoofbeats afar\par
sank into silence: so the songs tell us.\par
It was indeed in deepening gloom that the king came to Edoras, although\par
it was then but noon by the hour. There he halted only a short while and\par
strengthened his host by some three score of Riders that came late to the\par
weapontake. Now having eaten he made ready to set out again, and he wished his\par
esquire a kindly farewell. But Merry begged for the last time not to be parted\par
from him.\par
'This is no journey for such steeds as Stybba, as I have told you ' said\par
Th\'e9oden. 'And in such a battle as we think to make on the fields of Gondor\par
what would you do, Master Meriadoc, sword-thain though you be, and greater of\par
heart than of stature?'\par
'As for that, who can tell?' answered Merry. 'But why, lord, did you\par
receive me as sword-thain, if not to stay by your side? And I would not have\par
it said of me in song only that I was always left behind!'\par
'I received you for your safe-keeping,' answered Th\'e9oden; 'and also to do\par
as I might bid. None of my Riders can bear you as burden. If the battle were\par
before my gates, maybe your deeds would be remembered by the minstrels; but it\par
is a hundred leagues and two to Mundburg where Denethor is lord. I will say no\par
more.'\par
Merry bowed and went away unhappily, and stared at the lines of horsemen.\par
Already the companies were preparing to start: men were tightening girths,\par
looking to saddles, caressing their horses; some gazed uneasily at the\par
lowering sky. Unnoticed a Rider came up and spoke softly in the hobbit's ear.\par
'_Where will wants not, a way opens_, so we say,' he whispered; 'and so I\par
have found myself.' Merry looked up and saw that it was the young Rider whom\par
he had noticed in the morning. 'You wish to go whither the Lord of the Mark\par
goes: I see it in your face.'\par
'I do,' said Merry.\par
'Then you shall go with me,' said the Rider. 'I will bear you before me,\par
under my cloak until we are far afield, and this darkness is yet darker. Such\par
good will should not be denied. Say no more to any man, but come!'\par
'Thank you indeed!' said Merry. 'Thank you, sir, though I do not know\par
your name.'\par
'Do you not?' said the Rider softly. 'Then call me Dernhelm.'\par
Thus it came to pass that when the king set out, before Dernhelm sat\par
Meriadoc the hobbit, and the great grey steed Windfola made little of the\par
burden; for Dernhelm was less in weight than many men, though lithe and wellknit\par
in frame.\par
On into the shadow they rode. In the willow-thickets where Snowbourn\par
flowed into Entwash, twelve leagues east of Edoras, they camped that night.\par
And then on again through the Folde; and through the Fenmarch, where to their\par
right great oakwoods climbed on the skirts of the hills under the shades of\par
dark Halifirien by the borders of Gondor; but away to their left the mists lay\par
on the marshes fed by the mouths of Entwash. And as they rode rumour came of\par
war in the North. Lone men, riding wild, brought word of foes assailing their\par
east-borders, of orc-hosts marching in the Wold of Rohan.\par
'Ride on! Ride on!' cried \'c9omer. 'Too late now to turn aside. The fens of\par
Entwash must guard our flank. Haste now we need. Ride on!'\par
And so King Th\'e9oden departed from his own realm, and mile by mile the\par
long road wound away, and the beacon hills marched past: Calenhad, Min-Rimmon,\par
Erelas, Nardol. But their fires were quenched. All the lands were grey and\par
still; and ever the shadow deepened before them, and hope waned in every\par
heart.\par
_Chapter 4_\par
The Siege of Gondor\par
Pippin was roused by Gandalf. Candles were lit in their chamber, for only\par
a dim twilight came through the windows; the air was heavy as with approaching\par
thunder.\par
'What is the time?' said Pippin yawning.\par
'Past the second hour,' said Gandalf. 'Time to get up and make yourself\par
presentable. You are summoned to the Lord of the City to learn your new\par
duties.'\par
'And will he provide breakfast?'\par
'No! I have provided it: all that you will get till noon. Food is now\par
doled out by order.'\par
Pippin looked ruefully at the small loaf and (he thought) very inadequate\par
pat of butter which was set out for him, beside a cup of thin milk. 'Why did\par
you bring me here?' he said.\par
'You know quite well,' said Gandalf. 'To keep you out of mischief; and if\par
you do not like being here, you can remember that you brought it on\par
yourself.' Pippin said no more.\par
Before long he was walking with Gandalf once more down the cold corridor\par
to the door of the Tower Hall. There Denethor sat in a grey gloom, like an old\par
patient spider, Pippin thought: he did not seem to have moved since the day\par
before. He beckoned Gandalf to a seat, but Pippin was left for a while\par
standing unheeded. Presently the old man turned to him:\par
'Well, Master Peregrin, I hope that you used yesterday to your profit,\par
and to your liking? Though I fear that the board is barer in this city than\par
you could wish.'\par
Pippin had an uncomfortable feeling that most of what he had said or done\par
was somehow known to the Lord of the City, and much was guessed of what he\par
thought as well. He did not answer.\par
'What would you do in my service?'\par
'I thought, sir, that you would tell me my duties.'\par
'I will, when I learn what you are fit for,' said Denethor. 'But that I\par
shall learn soonest, maybe, if I keep you beside me. The esquire of my chamber\par
has begged leave to go to the out-garrison, so you shall take his place for a\par
while. You shall wait on me, bear errands, and talk to me, if war and council\par
leave me any leisure. Can you sing?'\par
'Yes,' said Pippin. 'Well, yes, well enough for my own people. But we\par
have no songs fit for great halls and evil times, lord. We seldom sing of\par
anything more terrible than wind or rain. And most of my songs are about\par
things that make us laugh; or about food and drink, of course.'\par
'And why should such songs be unfit for my halls, or for such hours as\par
these? We who have lived long under the Shadow may surely listen to echoes\par
from a land untroubled by it? Then we may feel that our vigil was not\par
fruitless, though it may have been thankless.'\par
Pippin's heart sank. He did not relish the idea of singing any song of\par
the Shire to the Lord of Minas Tirith, certainly not the comic ones that he\par
knew best; they were too, well, rustic for such an occasion. He was however\par
spared the ordeal for the present. He was not commanded to sing. Denethor\par
turned to Gandalf, asking questions about the Rohirrim and their policies, and\par
the position of \'c9omer, the king's nephew. Pippin marvelled at the amount that\par
the Lord seemed to know about a people that lived far away, though it must, he\par
thought, be many years since Denethor himself had ridden abroad.\par
Presently Denethor waved to Pippin and dismissed him again for a while.\par
'Go to the armouries of the Citadel,' he said, 'and get you there the livery\par
and gear of the Tower. It will be ready. It was commanded yesterday. Return\par
when you are clad!'\par
It was as he said; and Pippin soon found himself arrayed in strange\par
garments, all of black and silver. He had a small hauberk, its rings forged of\par
steel, maybe, yet black as jet; and a high-crowned helm with small raven-wings\par
on either side, set with a silver star in the centre of the circlet. Above the\par
mail was a short surcoat of black, but broidered on the breast in silver with\par
the token of the Tree. His old clothes were folded and put away, but he was\par
permitted to keep the grey cloak of L\'f3rien, though not to wear it when on\par
duty. He looked now, had he known it, verily _Ernil i Pheriannath_, the Prince\par
of the Halflings, that folk had called him; but he felt uncomfortable. And the\par
gloom began to weigh on his spirits.\par
It was dark and dim all day. From the sunless dawn until evening the\par
heavy shadow had deepened, and all hearts in the City were oppressed. Far\par
above a great cloud streamed slowly westward from the Black Land, devouring\par
light, borne upon a wind of war; but below the air was still and breathless,\par
as if all the Vale of Anduin waited for the onset of a ruinous storm.\par
About the eleventh hour, released at last for a while from service.\par
Pippin came out and went in search of food and drink to cheer his heavy heart\par
and make his task of waiting more supportable. In the messes he met Beregond\par
again, who had just come from an errand over the Pelennor out to the Guardtowers\par
upon the Causeway. Together they strolled out to the walls; for Pippin\par
felt imprisoned indoors, and stifled even in the lofty citadel. Now they sat\par
side by side again in the embrasure looking eastward, where they had eaten and\par
talked the day before.\par
It was the sunset-hour, but the great pall had now stretched far into the\par
West, and only as it sank at last into the Sea did the Sun escape to send out\par
a brief farewell gleam before the night, even as Frodo saw it at the Crossroads\par
touching the head of the fallen king. But to the fields of the Pelennor,\par
under the shadow of Mindolluin, there came no gleam: they were brown and\par
drear.\par
Already it seemed years to Pippin since he had sat there before, in some\par
half-forgotten time when he had still been a hobbit, a light-hearted wanderer\par
touched little by the perils he had passed through. Now he was one small\par
soldier in a city preparing for a great assault, clad in the proud but sombre\par
manner of the Tower of Guard.\par
In some other time and place Pippin might have been pleased with his new\par
array, but he knew now that he was taking part in no play; he was in deadly\par
earnest the servant of a grim master in the greatest peril. The hauberk was\par
burdensome, and the helm weighed upon his head. His cloak he had cast aside\par
upon the seat. He turned his tired gaze away from the darkling fields below\par
and yawned, and then he sighed.\par
'You are weary of this day?' said Beregond.\par
'Yes,' said Pippin, 'very: tired out with idleness and waiting. I have\par
kicked my heels at the door of my master's chamber for many slow hours, while\par
he has debated with Gandalf and the Prince and other great persons. And I'm\par
not used, Master Beregond, to waiting hungry on others while they eat. It is a\par
sore trial for a hobbit, that. No doubt you will think I should feel the\par
honour more deeply. But what is the good of such honour? Indeed what is the\par
good even of food and drink under this creeping shadow? What does it mean? The\par
very air seems thick and brown! Do you often have such glooms when the wind is\par
in the East?'\par
'Nay,' said Beregond, 'this is no weather of the world. This is some\par
device of his malice; some broil of fume from the Mountain of Fire that he\par
sends to darken hearts and counsel. And so it doth indeed. I wish the Lord\par
Faramir would return. He would not be dismayed. But now, who knows if he will\par
ever come back across the River out of the Darkness?'\par
'Yes,' said Pippin, 'Gandalf, too, is anxious. He was disappointed. I\par
think, not to find Faramir here. And where has he got to himself? He left the\par
Lord's council before the noon-meal, and in no good mood either, I thought.\par
Perhaps he has some foreboding of bad news.'\par
Suddenly as they talked they were stricken dumb, frozen as it were to\par
listening stones. Pippin cowered down with his hands pressed to his ears; but\par
Beregond, who had been looking out from the battlement as he spoke of Faramir,\par
remained there, stiffened, staring out with starting eyes. Pippin knew the\par
shuddering cry that he had heard: it was the same that he had heard long ago\par
in the Marish of the Shire, but now it was grown in power and hatred, piercing\par
the heart with a poisonous despair.\par
At last Beregond spoke with an effort. 'They have come!' he said. 'Take\par
courage and look! There are fell things below.'\par
Reluctantly Pippin climbed on to the seat and looked out over the wall.\par
The Pelennor lay dim beneath him, fading away to the scarce guessed line of\par
the Great River. But now wheeling swiftly across it, like shadows of untimely\par
night, he saw in the middle airs below him five birdlike forms, horrible as\par
carrion-fowl yet greater than eagles, cruel as death. Now they swooped near,\par
venturing almost within bowshot of the walls, now they circled away.\par
'Black Riders!' muttered Pippin. 'Black Riders of the air! But see,\par
Beregond!' he cried. 'They are looking for something, surely? See how they\par
wheel and swoop, always down to that point over there! And can you see\par
something moving on the ground? Dark little things. Yes, men on horses: four\par
or five. Ah! I cannot stand it! Gandalf! Gandalf save us!'\par
Another long screech rose and fell, and he threw himself back again from\par
the wall, panting like a hunted animal. Faint and seemingly remote through\par
that shuddering cry he heard winding up from below the sound of a trumpet\par
ending on a long high note.\par
'Faramir! The Lord Faramir! It is his call!' cried Beregond. 'Brave\par
heart! But how can he win to the Gate, if these foul hell-hawks have other\par
weapons than fear? But look! They hold on. They will make the Gate. No! the\par
horses are running mad. Look! the men are thrown; they are running on foot.\par
No, one is still up, but he rides back to the others. That will be the\par
Captain: he can master both beasts and men. Ah! there one of the foul things\par
is stooping on him. Help! help! Will no one go out to him? Faramir!'\par
With that Beregond sprang away and ran off into the gloom. Ashamed of his\par
terror, while Beregond of the Guard thought first of the captain whom he\par
loved, Pippin got up and peered out. At that moment he caught a flash of white\par
and silver coming from the North, like a small star down on the dusky fields.\par
It moved with the speed of an arrow and grew as it came, converging swiftly\par
with the flight of the four men towards the Gate. It seemed to Pippin that a\par
pale light was spread about it and the heavy shadows gave way before it; and\par
then as it drew near he thought that he heard, like an echo in the walls, a\par
great voice calling.\par
'Gandalf!' he cried. 'Gandalf! He always turns up when things are\par
darkest. Go on! Go on, White Rider! Gandalf, Gandalf!' he shouted wildly, like\par
an onlooker at a great race urging on a runner who is far beyond\par
encouragement.\par
But now the dark swooping shadows were aware of the newcomer. One wheeled\par
towards him; but it seemed to Pippin that he raised his hand, and from it a\par
shaft of white light stabbed upwards. The Nazg\'fbl gave a long wailing cry and\par
swerved away; and with that the four others wavered, and then rising in swift\par
spirals they passed away eastward vanishing into the lowering cloud above; and\par
down on the Pelennor it seemed for a while less dark.\par
Pippin watched, and he saw the horseman and the White Rider meet and\par
halt, waiting for those on foot. Men now hurried out to them from the City;\par
and soon they all passed from sight under the outer walls, and he knew that\par
they were entering the Gate. Guessing that they would come at once to the\par
Tower and the Steward, he hurried to the entrance of the citadel. There he was\par
joined by many others who had watched the race and the rescue from the high\par
walls.\par
It was not long before a clamour was heard in the streets leading up from\par
the outer circles, and there was much cheering and crying of the names of\par
Faramir and Mithrandir. Presently Pippin saw torches, and followed by a press\par
of people two horsemen riding slowly: one was in white but shining no longer,\par
pale in the twilight as if his fire was spent or veiled; the other was dark\par
and his head was bowed. They dismounted, and as grooms took Shadowfax and the\par
other horse, they walked forward to the sentinel at the gate: Gandalf\par
steadily, his grey cloak flung back, and a fire still smouldering in his eyes;\par
the other, clad all in green, slowly, swaying a little as a weary or a wounded\par
man.\par
Pippin pressed forward as they passed under the lamp beneath the gatearch,\par
and when he saw the pale face of Faramir he caught his breath. It was\par
the face of one who has been assailed by a great fear or anguish, but has\par
mastered it and now is quiet. Proud and grave he stood for a moment as he\par
spoke to the guard, and Pippin gazing at him saw how closely he resembled his\par
brother Boromir \endash  whom Pippin had liked from the first, admiring the great\par
man's lordly but kindly manner. Yet suddenly for Faramir his heart was\par
strangely moved with a feeling that he had not known before. Here was one with\par
an air of high nobility such as Aragorn at times revealed, less high perhaps,\par
yet also less incalculable and remote: one of the Kings of Men born into a\par
later time, but touched with the wisdom and sadness of the Elder Race. He knew\par
now why Beregond spoke his name with love. He was a captain that men would\par
follow, that he would follow, even under the shadow of the black wings.\par
'Faramir!' he cried aloud with the others. 'Faramir!' And Faramir\par
catching his strange voice among the clamour of the men of the City, turned\par
and looked down at him and was amazed.\par
'Whence come you?' he said. 'A halfling, and in the livery of the Tower!\par
Whence...?'\par
But with that Gandalf stepped to his side and spoke. 'He came with me\par
from the land of the Halflings,' he said. 'He came with me. But let us not\par
tarry here. There is much to say and to do, and you are weary. He shall come\par
with us. Indeed he must, for if he does not forget his new duties more easily\par
than I do, he must attend on his lord again within this hour. Come, Pippin,\par
follow us!'\par
So at length they came to the private chamber of the Lord of the City.\par
There deep seats were set about a brazier of charcoal; and wine was brought;\par
and there Pippin, hardly noticed, stood behind the chair of Denethor and felt\par
his weariness little, so eagerly did he listen to all that was said.\par
When Faramir had taken white bread and drunk a draught of wine, he sat\par
upon a low chair at his father's left hand. Removed a little upon the other\par
side sat Gandalf in a chair of carven wood; and he seemed at first to be\par
asleep. For at the beginning Faramir spoke only of the errand upon which he\par
had been sent out ten days before, and he brought tidings of Ithilien and of\par
movements of the Enemy and his allies; and he told of the fight on the road\par
when the men of Harad and their great beast were overthrown: a captain\par
reporting to his master such matters as had often been heard before, small\par
things of border-war that now seemed useless and petty, shorn of their renown.\par
Then suddenly Faramir looked at Pippin. 'But now we come to strange\par
matters,' he said. 'For this is not the first halfling that I have seen\par
walking out of northern legends into the Southlands.'\par
At that Gandalf sat up and gripped the arms of his chair; but he said\par
nothing, and with a look stopped the exclamation on Pippin's lips. Denethor\par
looked at their faces and nodded his head, as though in sign that he had read\par
much there before it was spoken. Slowly, while the others sat silent and\par
still, Faramir told his tale, with his eyes for the most part on Gandalf,\par
though now and again his glance strayed to Pippin, as if to refresh his memory\par
of others that he had seen.\par
As his story was unfolded of his meeting with Frodo and his servant and\par
of the events at Henneth Ann\'fbn, Pippin became aware that Gandalf's hands were\par
trembling as they clutched the carven wood. White they seemed now and very\par
old, and as he looked at them, suddenly with a thrill of fear Pippin knew that\par
Gandalf, Gandalf himself, was troubled, even afraid. The air of the room was\par
close and still. At last when Faramir spoke of his parting with the\par
travellers, and of their resolve to go to Cirith Ungol, his voice fell, and he\par
shook his head and sighed. Then Gandalf sprang up.\par
'Cirith Ungol? Morgul Vale?' he said. 'The time, Faramir, the time? When\par
did you part with them? When would they reach that accursed valley?'\par
'I parted with them in the morning two days ago,' said Faramir. 'It is\par
fifteen leagues thence to the vale of the Morgulduin, if they went straight\par
south; and then they would be still five leagues westward of the accursed\par
Tower. At swiftest they could not come there before today, and maybe they have\par
not come there yet. Indeed I see what you fear. But the darkness is not due to\par
their venture. It began yestereve, and all Ithilien was under shadow last\par
night. It is clear to me that the Enemy has long planned an assault on us, and\par
its hour had already been determined before ever the travellers left my\par
keeping.'\par
Gandalf paced the floor. 'The morning of two days ago, nigh on three days\par
of journey! How far is the place where you parted?'\par
'Some twenty-five leagues as a bird flies,' answered Faramir. 'But I\par
could not come more swiftly. Yestereve I lay at Cair Andros, the long isle in\par
the River northward which we hold in defence; and horses are kept on the\par
hither bank. As the dark drew on I knew that haste was needed, so I rode\par
thence with three others that could also be horsed. The rest of my company I\par
sent south to strengthen the garrison at the fords of Osgiliath. I hope that I\par
have not done ill?' He looked at his father.\par
'Ill?' cried Denethor, and his eyes flashed suddenly. 'Why do you ask?\par
The men were under your command. Or do you ask for my judgement on all your\par
deeds? Your bearing is lowly in my presence, yet it is long now since you\par
turned from your own way at my counsel. See, you have spoken skilfully, as\par
ever; but I, have I not seen your eye fixed on Mithrandir, seeking whether you\par
said well or too much? He has long had your heart in his keeping.\par
'My son, your father is old but not yet dotard. I can see and hear, as\par
was my wont; and little of what you have half said or left unsaid is now\par
hidden from me. I know the answer to many riddles. Alas, alas for Boromir!'\par
'If what I have done displeases you, my father,' said Faramir quietly, 'I\par
wish I had known your counsel before the burden of so weighty a judgement was\par
thrust on me.'\par
'Would that have availed to change your judgement?' said Denethor. 'You\par
would still have done just so, I deem. I know you well. Ever your desire is to\par
appear lordly and generous as a king of old, gracious, gentle. That may well\par
befit one of high race, if he sits in power and peace. But in desperate hours\par
gentleness may be repaid with death.'\par
'So be it,' said Faramir.\par
'So be it!' cried Denethor. 'But not with your death only, Lord Faramir:\par
with the death also of your father, and of all your people, whom it is your\par
part to protect now that Boromir is gone.'\par
'Do you wish then,' said Faramir, 'that our places had been exchanged?'\par
'Yes, I wish that indeed,' said Denethor. 'For Boromir was loyal to me\par
and no wizard's pupil. He would have remembered his father's need, and would\par
not have squandered what fortune gave. He would have brought me a mighty\par
gift.'\par
For a moment Faramir's restraint gave way. 'I would ask you, my father,\par
to remember why it was that I, not he, was in Ithilien. On one occasion at\par
least your counsel has prevailed, not long ago. It was the Lord of the City\par
that gave the errand to him.'\par
'Stir not the bitterness in the cup that I mixed for myself,' said\par
Denethor. 'Have I not tasted it now many nights upon my tongue foreboding that\par
worse yet lay in the dregs? As now indeed I find. Would it were not so! Would\par
that this thing had come to me!'\par
'Comfort yourself!' said Gandalf. 'In no case would Boromir have brought\par
it to you. He is dead, and died well; may he sleep in peace! Yet you deceive\par
yourself. He would have stretched out his hand to this thing, and taking it he\par
would have fallen. He would have kept it for his own, and when he returned you\par
would not have known your son.'\par
The face of Denethor set hard and cold. 'You found Boromir less apt to\par
your hand, did you not?' he said softly. 'But I who was his father say that he\par
would have brought it to me. You are wise, maybe, Mithrandir, yet with all\par
your subtleties you have not all wisdom. Counsels may be found that are\par
neither the webs of wizards nor the haste of fools. I have in this matter more\par
lore and wisdom than you deem. '\par
'What then is your wisdom?' said Gandalf.\par
'Enough to perceive that there are two follies to avoid. To use this\par
thing is perilous. At this hour, to send it in the hands of a witless halfling\par
into the land of the Enemy himself, as you have done, and this son of mine,\par
that is madness.'\par
'And the Lord Denethor what would he have done?'\par
'Neither. But most surely not for any argument would he have set this\par
thing at a hazard beyond all but a fool's hope, risking our utter ruin, if the\par
Enemy should recover what he lost. Nay, it should have been kept, hidden,\par
hidden dark and deep. Not used, I say, unless at the uttermost end of need,\par
but set beyond his grasp, save by a victory so final that what then befell\par
would not trouble us, being dead.'\par
'You think, as is your wont, my lord, of Gondor only,' said Gandalf. 'Yet\par
there are other men and other lives, and time still to be. And for me, I pity\par
even his slaves.'\par
'And where will other men look for help, if Gondor falls?' answered\par
Denethor. 'If I had this thing now in the deep vaults of this citadel, we\par
should not then shake with dread under this gloom, fearing the worst, and our\par
counsels would be undisturbed. If you do not trust me to endure the test, you\par
do not know me yet.'\par
'Nonetheless I do not trust you,' said Gandalf. 'Had I done so, I could\par
have sent this thing hither to your keeping and spared myself and others much\par
anguish. And now hearing you speak I trust you less, no more than Boromir.\par
Nay, stay your wrath! I do not trust myself in this, and I refused this thing,\par
even as a freely given gift. You are strong and can still in some matters\par
govern yourself, Denethor; yet if you had received this thing, it would have\par
overthrown you. Were it buried beneath the roots of Mindolluin, still it would\par
burn your mind away, as the darkness grows, and the yet worse things follow\par
that soon shall come upon us.'\par
For a moment the eyes of Denethor glowed again as he faced Gandalf, and\par
Pippin felt once more the strain between their wills; but now almost it seemed\par
as if their glances were like blades from eye to eye, flickering as they\par
fenced. Pippin trembled fearing some dreadful stroke. But suddenly Denethor\par
relaxed and grew cold again. He shrugged his shoulders.\par
'If I had! If you had!' he said. 'Such words and ifs are vain. It has\par
gone into the Shadow, and only time will show what doom awaits it and us. The\par
time will not be long. In what is left, let all who fight the Enemy in their\par
fashion be at one, and keep hope while they may, and after hope still the\par
hardihood to die free.' He turned to Faramir. 'What think you of the garrison\par
at Osgiliath?'\par
'It is not strong,' said Faramir. 'I have sent the company of Ithilien to\par
strengthen it, as I have said.'\par
'Not enough, I deem,' said Denethor. 'It is there that the first blow\par
will fall. They will have need of some stout captain there.'\par
'There and elsewhere in many places,' said Faramir, and sighed. 'Alas for\par
my brother, whom I too loved!' He rose. 'May I have your leave, father?' And\par
then he swayed and leaned upon his father's chair.\par
'You are weary, I see,' said Denethor. 'You have ridden fast and far, and\par
under shadows of evil in the air, I am told.'\par
'Let us not speak of that!' said Faramir.\par
'Then we will not,' said Denethor. 'Go now and rest as you may.\par
Tomorrow's need will be sterner.'\par
All now took leave of the Lord of the City and went to rest while they\par
still could. Outside there was a starless blackness as Gandalf with Pippin\par
beside him bearing a small torch, made his way to their lodging. They did not\par
speak until they were behind closed doors. Then at last Pippin took Gandalf's\par
hand.\par
'Tell me,' he said, 'is there any hope? For Frodo, I mean; or at least\par
mostly for Frodo.'\par
Gandalf put his hand on Pippin's head. 'There never was much hope,' he\par
answered. 'Just a fool's hope, as I have been told. And when I heard of Cirith\par
Ungol\endash\endash\endash ' He broke off and strode to the window as if his eyes could pierce\par
the night in the East. 'Cirith Ungol!' he muttered. 'Why that way, I wonder?'\par
He turned. 'Just now, Pippin, my heart almost failed me, hearing that name.\par
And yet in truth I believe that the news that Faramir brings has some hope in\par
it. For it seems clear that our Enemy has opened his war at last and made the\par
first move while Frodo was still free. So now for many days he will have his\par
eye turned this way and that, away from his own land. And yet, Pippin, I feel\par
from afar his haste and fear. He has begun sooner than he would. Something has\par
happened to stir him.'\par
Gandalf stood for a moment in thought. 'Maybe,' he muttered. 'Maybe even\par
your foolishness helped, my lad. Let me see: some five days ago now he would\par
discover that we had thrown down Saruman and had taken the Stone. Still what\par
of that? We could not use it to much purpose, or without his knowing. Ah! I\par
wonder. Aragorn? His time draws near. And he is strong and stern underneath,\par
Pippin; bold, determined, able to take his own counsel and dare great risks at\par
need. That may be it. He may have used the Stone and shown himself to the\par
Enemy, challenging him, for this very purpose. I wonder. Well, we shall not\par
know the answer till the Riders of Rohan come, if they do not come too late.\par
There are evil days ahead. To sleep while we may!'\par
'But,' said Pippin.\par
'But what?' said Gandalf. 'Only one _but_ will I allow tonight.'\par
'Gollum,' said Pippin. 'How on earth could they be going about _with_\par
him, even following him? And I could see that Faramir did not like the place\par
he was taking them to any more than you do. What is wrong?'\par
'I cannot answer that now,' said Gandalf. 'Yet my heart guessed that\par
Frodo and Gollum would meet before the end. For good, or for evil. But of\par
Cirith Ungol I will not speak tonight. Treachery, treachery I fear; treachery\par
of that miserable creature. But so it must be. Let us remember that a traitor\par
may betray himself and do good that he does not intend. It can be so,\par
sometimes. Good night! '\par
The next day came with a morning like a brown dusk, and the hearts of\par
men, lifted for a while by the return of Faramir, sank low again. The winged\par
Shadows were not seen again that day, yet ever and anon, high above the city,\par
a faint cry would come, and many who heard it would stand stricken with a\par
passing dread, while the less stout-hearted quailed and wept.\par
And now Faramir was gone again. 'They give him no rest,' some murmured.\par
'The Lord drives his son too hard, and now he must do the duty of two, for\par
himself and for the one that will not return.' And ever men looked northward,\par
asking: 'Where are the Riders of Rohan?'\par
In truth Faramir did not go by his own choosing. But the Lord of the City\par
was master of his Council, and he was in no mood that day to bow to others.\par
Early in the morning the Council had been summoned. There all the captains\par
judged that because of the threat in the South their force was too weak to\par
make any stroke of war on their own part, unless perchance the Riders of Rohan\par
yet should come. Meanwhile they must man the walls and wait.\par
'Yet,' said Denethor, 'we should not lightly abandon the outer defences,\par
the Rammas made with so great a labour. And the Enemy must pay dearly for the\par
crossing of the River. That he cannot do, in force to assail the City, either\par
north of Cair Andros because of the marshes, or southwards towards Lebennin\par
because of the breadth of the River, that needs many boats. It is at Osgiliath\par
that he will put his weight, as before when Boromir denied him the passage.'\par
'That was but a trial,' said Faramir. 'Today we may make the Enemy pay\par
ten times our loss at the passage and yet rue the exchange. For he can afford\par
to lose a host better than we to lose a company. And the retreat of those that\par
we put out far afield will be perilous, if he wins across in force.'\par
'And what of Cair Andros?' said the Prince. 'That, too, must be held, if\par
Osgiliath is defended. Let us not forget the danger on our left. The Rohirrim\par
may come, and they may not. But Faramir has told us of great strength drawing\par
ever to the Black Gate. More than one host may issue from it, and strike for\par
more than one passage.'\par
'Much must be risked in war,' said Denethor. 'Cair Andros is manned and\par
no more can be sent so far. But I will not yield the River and the Pelennor\par
unfought \endash  not if there is a captain here who has still the courage to do his\par
lord's will.'\par
Then all were silent, but at length Faramir said: 'I do not oppose your\par
will, sire. Since you are robbed of Boromir, I will go and do what I can in\par
his stead \endash  if you command it.'\par
'I do so,' said Denethor.\par
'Then farewell!' said Faramir. 'But if I should return, think better of\par
me!'\par
'That depends on the manner of your return,' said Denethor.\par
Gandalf it was that last spoke to Faramir ere he rode east. 'Do not throw\par
your live away rashly or in bitterness,' he said. 'You will be needed here,\par
for other things than war. Your father loves you, Faramir, and will remember\par
it ere the end. Farewell!'\par
So now the Lord Faramir had gone forth again, and had taken with him such\par
strength of men as were willing to go or could be spared. On the walls some\par
gazed through the gloom towards the ruined city, and they wondered what\par
chanced there, for nothing could be seen. And others, as ever, looked north\par
and counted the leagues to Th\'e9oden in Rohan. 'Will he come? Will he remember\par
our old alliance?' they said.\par
'Yes, he will come,' said Gandalf, 'even if he comes too late. But think!\par
At best the Red Arrow cannot have reached him more than two days ago, and the\par
miles are long from Edoras.'\par
It was night again ere news came. A man rode in haste from the fords,\par
saying that a host had issued from Minas Morgul and was already drawing nigh\par
to Osgiliath; and it had been joined by regiments from the South, Haradrim,\par
cruel and tall. 'And we have learned ' said the messenger, 'that the Black\par
Captain leads them once again, and the fear of him has passed before him over\par
the River.'\par
With those ill-boding words the third day closed since Pippin came to\par
Minas Tirith. Few went to rest, for small hope had any now that even Faramir\par
could hold the fords for long.\par
The next day, though the darkness had reached its full and grew no\par
deeper, it weighed heavier on men's hearts, and a great dread was on them. Ill\par
news came soon again. The passage of Anduin was won by the Enemy. Faramir was\par
retreating to the wall of the Pelennor, rallying his men to the Causeway\par
Forts; but he was ten times outnumbered.\par
'If he wins back at all across the Pelennor, his enemies will be on his\par
heels,' said the messenger. 'They have paid dear for the crossing but less\par
dearly than we hoped. The plan has been well laid. It is now seen that in\par
secret they have long been building floats and barges in great numbers in East\par
Osgiliath. They swarmed across like beetles. But it is the Black Captain that\par
defeats us. Few will stand and abide even the rumour of his coming. His own\par
folk quail at him, and they would slay themselves at his bidding.'\par
'Then I am needed there more than here,' said Gandalf, and rode off at\par
once, and the glimmer of him faded soon from sight. And all that night Pippin\par
alone and sleepless stood upon the wall and gazed eastward.\par
The bells of day had scarcely rung out again, a mockery in the\par
unlightened dark, when far away he saw fires spring up, across in the dim\par
spaces where the walls of the Pelennor stood. The watchmen cried aloud, and\par
all men in the City stood to arms. Now ever and anon there was a red flash,\par
and slowly through the heavy air dull rumbles could be heard.\par
'They have taken the wall!' men cried. 'They are blasting breaches in it.\par
They are coming!'\par
'Where is Faramir?' cried Beregond in dismay. 'Say not that he has\par
fallen!'\par
It was Gandalf that brought the first tidings. With a handful of horsemen\par
he came in the middle morning, riding as escort to a line of wains. They were\par
filled with wounded men, all that could be saved from the wreck of the\par
Causeway Forts. At once he went to Denethor. The Lord of the City sat now in a\par
high chamber above the Hall of the White Tower with Pippin at his side; and\par
through the dim windows, north and south and east, he bent his dark eyes, as\par
if to pierce the shadows of doom that ringed him round. Most to the north he\par
looked, and would pause at whiles to listen as if by some ancient art his ears\par
might hear the thunder of hoofs on the plains far away.\par
'Is Faramir come?' he asked.\par
'No,' said Gandalf. 'But he still lived when I left him. Yet he is\par
resolved to stay with the rearguard, lest the retreat over the Pelennor become\par
a rout. He may, perhaps, hold his men together long enough, but I doubt it. He\par
is pitted against a foe too great. For one has come that I feared.'\par
'Not \endash  the Dark Lord?' cried Pippin, forgetting his place in his terror.\par
Denethor laughed bitterly. 'Nay, not yet, Master Peregrin! He will not\par
come save only to triumph over me when all is won. He uses others as his\par
weapons. So do all great lords, if they are wise, Master Halfling. Or why\par
should I sit here in my tower and think, and watch, and wait, spending even my\par
sons? For I can still wield a brand.'\par
He stood up and cast open his long black cloak, and behold! he was clad\par
in mail beneath, and girt with a long sword, great-hilted in a sheath of black\par
and silver. 'Thus have I walked, and thus now for many years have I slept,' he\par
said, 'lest with age the body should grow soft and timid.'\par
'Yet now under the Lord of Barad-d\'fbr the most fell of all his captains is\par
already master of your outer walls,' said Gandalf. 'King of Angmar long ago,\par
Sorcerer, Ringwraith, Lord of the Nazg\'fbl, a spear of terror in the hand of\par
Sauron, shadow of despair.'\par
'Then, Mithrandir, you had a foe to match you,' said Denethor. 'For\par
myself, I have long known who is the chief captain of the hosts of the Dark\par
Tower. Is this all that you have returned to say? Or can it be that you have\par
withdrawn because you are overmatched?'\par
Pippin trembled, fearing that Gandalf would be stung to sudden wrath, but\par
his fear was needless. 'It might be so,' Gandalf answered softly. 'But our\par
trial of strength is not yet come. And if words spoken of old be true, not by\par
the hand of man shall he fall, and hidden from the Wise is the doom that\par
awaits him. However that may be, the Captain of Despair does not press\par
forward, yet. He rules rather according to the wisdom that you have just\par
spoken, from the rear, driving his slaves in madness on before.\par
'Nay, I came rather to guard the hurt men that can yet be healed; for the\par
Rammas is breached far and wide, and soon the host of Morgul will enter in at\par
many points. And I came chiefly to say this. Soon there will be battle on the\par
fields. A sortie must be made ready. Let it be of mounted men. In them lies\par
our brief hope, for in one thing only is the enemy still poorly provided: he\par
has few horsemen.'\par
'And we also have few. Now would the coming of Rohan be in the nick of\par
time,' said Denethor.\par
'We are likely to see other newcomers first,' said Gandalf. 'Fugitives\par
from Cair Andros have already reached us. The isle has fallen. Another army is\par
come from the Black Gate, crossing from the north-east.'\par
'Some have accused you, Mithrandir, of delighting to bear ill news,' said\par
Denethor, 'but to me this is no longer news: it was known to me ere nightfall\par
yesterday. As for the sortie, I had already given thought to it. Let us go\par
down.'\par
Time passed. At length watchers on the walls could see the retreat of the\par
out-companies. Small bands of weary and often wounded men came first with\par
little order; some were running wildly as if pursued. Away to the eastward the\par
distant fires flickered; and now it seemed that here and there they crept\par
across the plain. Houses and barns were burning. Then from many points little\par
rivers of red flame came hurrying on, winding through the gloom, converging\par
towards the line of the broad road that led from the City-gate to Osgiliath.\par
'The enemy,' men murmured. 'The dike is down. Here they come pouring\par
through the breaches! And they carry torches, it seems. Where are our own\par
folk?'\par
It drew now to evening by the hour, and the light was so dim that even\par
far-sighted men upon the Citadel could discern little clearly out upon the\par
fields, save only the burnings that ever multiplied, and the lines of fire\par
that grew in length and speed. At last, less than a mile from the City, a more\par
ordered mass of men came into view, marching not running, still holding\par
together.\par
The watchers held their breath. 'Faramir must be there,' they said. 'He\par
can govern man and beast. He will make it yet.'\par
Now the main retreat was scarcely two furlongs distant. Out of the gloom\par
behind a small company of horsemen galloped, all that was left of the\par
rearguard. Once again they turned at bay, facing the oncoming lines of fire.\par
Then suddenly there was a tumult of fierce cries. Horsemen of the enemy swept\par
up. The lines of fire became flowing torrents, file upon file of Orcs bearing\par
flames, and wild Southron men with red banners, shouting with harsh tongues,\par
surging up, overtaking the retreat. And with a piercing cry out of the dim sky\par
fell the winged shadows, the Nazg\'fbl stooping to the kill.\par
The retreat became a rout. Already men were breaking away, flying wild\par
and witless here and there, flinging away their weapons, crying out in fear,\par
falling to the ground.\par
And then a trumpet rang from the Citadel, and Denethor at last released\par
the sortie. Drawn up within the shadow of the Gate and under the looming walls\par
outside they had waited for his signal: all the mounted men that were left in\par
the City. Now they sprang forward, formed, quickened to a gallop, and charged\par
with a great shout. And from the walls an answering shout went up; for\par
foremost on the field rode the swan-knights of Dol Amroth with their Prince\par
and his blue banner at their head.\par
'Amroth for Gondor!' they cried. 'Amroth to Faramir!'\par
Like thunder they broke upon the enemy on either flank of the retreat;\par
but one rider outran them all, swift as the wind in the grass: Shadowfax bore\par
him, shining, unveiled once more, a light starting from his upraised hand.\par
The Nazg\'fbl screeched and swept away, for their Captain was not yet come\par
to challenge the white fire of his foe. The hosts of Morgul intent on their\par
prey, taken at unawares in wild career, broke, scattering like sparks in a\par
gale. The out-companies with a great cheer turned and smote their pursuers.\par
Hunters became the hunted. The retreat became an onslaught. The field was\par
strewn with stricken orcs and men, and a reek arose of torches cast away,\par
sputtering out in swirling smoke. The cavalry rode on.\par
But Denethor did not permit them to go far. Though the enemy was checked,\par
and for the moment driven back, great forces were flowing in from the East.\par
Again the trumpet rang, sounding the retreat. The cavalry of Gondor halted.\par
Behind their screen the out-companies re-formed. Now steadily they came\par
marching back. They reached the Gate of the City and entered, stepping\par
proudly: and proudly the people of the City looked on them and cried their\par
praise, and yet they were troubled in heart. For the companies were grievously\par
reduced. Faramir had lost a third of his men. And where was he?\par
Last of all he came. His men passed in. The mounted knights returned, and\par
at their rear the banner of Dol Amroth, and the Prince. And in his arms before\par
him on his horse he bore the body of his kinsman, Faramir son of Denethor,\par
found upon the stricken field.\par
'Faramir! Faramir!' men cried, weeping in the streets. But he did not\par
answer, and they bore him away up the winding road to the Citadel and his\par
father. Even as the Nazg\'fbl had swerved aside from the onset of the White\par
Rider, there came flying a deadly dart, and Faramir, as he held at bay a\par
mounted champion of Harad, had fallen to the earth. Only the charge of Dol\par
Amroth had saved him from the red southland swords that would have hewed him\par
as he lay.\par
The Prince Imrahil brought Faramir to the White Tower, and he said: Your\par
son has returned, lord, after great deeds, and he told all that he had seen.\par
But Denethor rose and looked on the face of his son and was silent. Then he\par
bade them make a bed in the chamber and lay Faramir upon it and depart. But he\par
himself went up alone into the secret room under the summit of the Tower; and\par
many who looked up thither at that time saw a pale light that gleamed and\par
flickered from the narrow windows for a while, and then flashed and went out.\par
And when Denethor descended again he went to Faramir and sat beside him\par
without speaking, but the face of the Lord was grey, more deathlike than his\par
son's.\par
So now at last the City was besieged, enclosed in a ring of foes. The\par
Rammas was broken, and all the Pelennor abandoned to the Enemy. The last word\par
to come from outside the walls was brought by men flying down the northward\par
road ere the Gate was shut. They were the remnant of the guard that was kept\par
at that point where the way from An\'f3rien and Rohan ran into the townlands:\par
Ingold led them, the same who had admitted Gandalf and Pippin less than five\par
days before, while the sun still rose and there was hope in the morning.\par
'There is no news of the Rohirrim,' he said. 'Rohan will not come now. Or\par
if they come, it will not avail us. The new host that we had tidings of has\par
come first, from over the River by way of Andros, it is said. They are strong:\par
battalions of Orcs of the Eye, and countless companies of Men of a new sort\par
that we have not met before. Not tall, but broad and grim, bearded like\par
dwarves, wielding great axes. Out of some savage land in the wide East they\par
come, we deem. They hold the northward road; and many have passed on into\par
An\'f3rien. The Rohirrim cannot come.'\par
The Gate was shut. All night watchmen on the walls heard the rumour of\par
the enemy that roamed outside, burning field and tree, and hewing any man that\par
they found abroad, living or dead. The numbers that had already passed over\par
the River could not be guessed in the darkness, but when morning, or its dim\par
shadow, stole over the plain, it was seen that even fear by night had scarcely\par
over-counted them. The plain was dark with their marching companies, and as\par
far as eyes could strain in the mirk there sprouted, like a foul fungusgrowth,\par
all about the beleaguered city great camps of tents, black or sombre\par
red.\par
Busy as ants hurrying orcs were digging, digging lines of deep trenches\par
in a huge ring, just out of bowshot from the walls; and as the trenches were\par
made each was filled with fire, though how it was kindled or fed, by art or\par
devilry, none could see. All day the labour went forward, while the men of\par
Minas Tirith looked on, unable to hinder it. And as each length of trench was\par
completed, they could see great wains approaching; and soon yet more companies\par
of the enemy were swiftly setting up, each behind the cover of a trench, great\par
engines for the casting of missiles. There were none upon the City walls large\par
enough to reach so far or to stay the work.\par
At first men laughed and did not greatly fear such devices. For the main\par
wall of the City was of great height and marvellous thickness, built ere the\par
power and craft of N\'famenor waned in exile; and its outward face was like to\par
the Tower of Orthanc, hard and dark and smooth, unconquerable by steel or\par
fire, unbreakable except by some convulsion that would rend the very earth on\par
which it stood.\par
'Nay,' they said, 'not if the Nameless One himself should come, not even\par
he could enter here while we yet live.' But some answered: 'While we yet live?\par
How long? He has a weapon that has brought low many strong places since the\par
world began. Hunger. The roads are cut. Rohan will not come.'\par
But the engines did not waste shot upon the indomitable wall. It was no\par
brigand or orc-chieftain that ordered the assault upon the Lord of Mordor's\par
greatest foe. A power and mind of malice guided it. As soon as the great\par
catapults were set, with many yells and the creaking of rope and winch, they\par
began to throw missiles marvellously high, so that they passed right above the\par
battlement and fell thudding within the first circle of the City; and many of\par
them by some secret art burst into flame as they came toppling down.\par
Soon there was great peril of fire behind the wall, and all who could be\par
spared were busy quelling the flames that sprang up in many places. Then among\par
the greater casts there fell another hail, less ruinous but more horrible. All\par
about the streets and lanes behind the Gate it tumbled down, small round shot\par
that did not burn. But when men ran to learn what it might be, they cried\par
aloud or wept. For the enemy was flinging into the City all the heads of those\par
who had fallen fighting at Osgiliath, or on the Rammas, or in the fields. They\par
were grim to look on; for though some were crushed and shapeless, and some had\par
been cruelly hewn, yet many had features that could be told, and it seemed\par
that they had died in pain; and all were branded with the foul token of the\par
Lidless Eye. But marred and dishonoured as they were, it often chanced that\par
thus a man would see again the face of someone that he had known, who had\par
walked proudly once in arms, or tilled the fields, or ridden in upon a holiday\par
from the green vales in the hills.\par
In vain men shook their fists at the pitiless foes that swarmed before\par
the Gate. Curses they heeded not, nor understood the tongues of western men;\par
crying with harsh voices like beasts and carrion-birds. But soon there were\par
few left in Minas Tirith who had the heart to stand up and defy the hosts of\par
Mordor. For yet another weapon, swifter than hunger, the Lord of the Dark\par
Tower had: dread and despair.\par
The Nazg\'fbl came again, and as their Dark Lord now grew and put forth his\par
strength, so their voices, which uttered only his will and his malice, were\par
filled with evil and horror. Ever they circled above the City, like vultures\par
that expect their fill of doomed men's flesh. Out of sight and shot they flew,\par
and yet were ever present, and their deadly voices rent the air. More\par
unbearable they became, not less, at each new cry. At length even the stouthearted\par
would fling themselves to the ground as the hidden menace passed over\par
them, or they would stand, letting their weapons fall from nerveless hands\par
while into their minds a blackness came, and they thought no more of war, but\par
only of hiding and of crawling, and of death.\par
During all this black day Faramir lay upon his bed in the chamber of the\par
White Tower, wandering in a desperate fever; dying someone said, and soon\par
'dying' all men were saying upon the walls and in the streets. And by him his\par
father sat, and said nothing, but watched, and gave no longer any heed to the\par
defence.\par
No hours so dark had Pippin known, not even in the clutches of the Urukhai.\par
It was his duty to wait upon the Lord, and wait he did, forgotten it\par
seemed, standing by the door of the unlit chamber, mastering his own fears as\par
best he could. And as he watched, it seemed to him that Denethor grew old\par
before his eyes, as if something had snapped in his proud will, and his stern\par
mind was overthrown. Grief maybe had wrought it, and remorse. He saw tears on\par
that once tearless face, more unbearable than wrath.\par
'Do not weep, lord,' he stammered. 'Perhaps he will get well. Have you\par
asked Gandalf?'\par
'Comfort me not with wizards!' said Denethor. 'The fool's hope has\par
failed. The Enemy has found it, and now his power waxes; he sees our very\par
thoughts, and all we do is ruinous.\par
'I sent my son forth, unthanked, unblessed, out into needless peril, and\par
here he lies with poison in his veins. Nay, nay, whatever may now betide in\par
war, my line too is ending, even the House of the Stewards has failed. Mean\par
folk shall rule the last remnant of the Kings of Men, lurking in the hills\par
until all are hounded out.'\par
Men came to the door crying for the Lord of the City. 'Nay, I will not\par
come down,' he said. 'I must stay beside my son. He might still speak before\par
the end. But that is near. Follow whom you will, even the Grey Fool, though\par
his hope has failed. Here I stay.'\par
So it was that Gandalf took command of the last defence of the City of\par
Gondor. Wherever he came men's hearts would lift again, and the winged shadows\par
pass from memory. Tirelessly he strode from Citadel to Gate, from north to\par
south about the wall; and with him went the Prince of Dol Amroth in his\par
shining mail. For he and his knights still held themselves like lords in whom\par
the race of N\'famenor ran true. Men that saw them whispered saying: 'Belike the\par
old tales speak well; there is Elvish blood in the veins of that folk, for the\par
people of Nimrodel dwelt in that land once long ago.' And then one would sing\par
amid the gloom some staves of the Lay of Nimrodel, or other songs of the Vale\par
of Anduin out of vanished years.\par
And yet \endash  when they had gone, the shadows closed on men again, and their\par
hearts went cold, and the valour of Gondor withered into ash. And so slowly\par
they passed out of a dim day of fears into the darkness of a desperate night.\par
Fires now raged unchecked in the first circle of the City, and the garrison\par
upon the outer wall was already in many places cut off from retreat. But the\par
faithful who remained there at their posts were few; most had fled beyond the\par
second gate.\par
Far behind the battle the River had been swiftly bridged, and all day\par
more force and gear of war had poured across. Now at last in the middle night\par
the assault was loosed. The vanguard passed through the trenches of fire by\par
many devious paths that had been left between them. On they came, reckless of\par
their loss as they approached, still bunched and herded, within the range of\par
bowmen on the wall. But indeed there were too few now left there to do them\par
great damage, though the light of the fires showed up many a mark for archers\par
of such skill as Gondor once had boasted. Then perceiving that the valour of\par
the City was already beaten down, the hidden Captain put forth his strength.\par
Slowly the great siege-towers built in Osgiliath rolled forward through the\par
dark.\par
Messengers came again to the chamber in the White Tower, and Pippin let\par
them enter, for they were urgent. Denethor turned his head slowly from\par
Faramir's face, and looked at them silently.\par
'The first circle of the City is burning, lord,' they said. 'What are\par
your commands? You are still the Lord and Steward. Not all will follow\par
Mithrandir. Men are flying from the walls and leaving them unmanned.'\par
'Why? Why do the fools fly?' said Denethor. 'Better to burn sooner than\par
late, for burn we must. Go back to your bonfire! And I? I will go now to my\par
pyre. To my pyre! No tomb for Denethor and Faramir. No tomb! No long slow\par
sleep of death embalmed. We will burn like heathen kings before ever a ship\par
sailed hither from the West. The West has failed. Go back and burn!'\par
The messengers without bow or answer turned and fled.\par
Now Denethor stood up and released the fevered hand of Faramir that he\par
had held. 'He is burning, already burning,' he said sadly. 'The house of his\par
spirit crumbles.' Then stepping softly towards Pippin he looked down at him.\par
'Farewell!' he said. 'Farewell, Peregrin son of Paladin! Your service has\par
been short, and now it is drawing to an end. I release you from the little\par
that remains. Go now, and die in what way seems best to you. And with whom you\par
will, even that friend whose folly brought you to this death. Send for my\par
servants and then go. Farewell!'\par
'I will not say farewell, my lord,' said Pippin kneeling. And then\par
suddenly hobbit-like once more, he stood up and looked the old man in the\par
eyes. 'I will take your leave, sir,' he said; 'for I want to see Gandalf very\par
much indeed. But he is no fool; and I will not think of dying until he\par
despairs of life. But from my word and your service I do not wish to be\par
released while you live. And if they come at last to the Citadel, I hope to be\par
here and stand beside you and earn perhaps the arms that you have given me.'\par
'Do as you will, Master Halfling,' said Denethor. 'But my life is broken.\par
Send for my servants!' He turned back to Faramir.\par
Pippin left him and called for the servants, and they came: six men of\par
the household, strong and fair; yet they trembled at the summons. But in a\par
quiet voice Denethor bade them lay warm coverlets on Faramir's bed and take it\par
up. And they did so, and lifting up the bed they bore it from the chamber.\par
Slowly they paced to trouble the fevered man as little as might be, and\par
Denethor, now bending on a staff, followed them; and last came Pippin.\par
Out from the White Tower they walked, as if to a funeral, out into the\par
darkness, where the overhanging cloud was lit beneath with flickers of dull\par
red. Softly they paced the great courtyard, and at a word from Denethor halted\par
beside the Withered Tree.\par
All was silent, save for the rumour of war in the City down below, and\par
they heard the water dripping sadly from the dead branches into the dark pool.\par
Then they went on through the Citadel gate, where the sentinel stared at them\par
in wonder and dismay as they passed by. Turning westward they came at length\par
to a door in the rearward wall of the sixth circle. Fen Hollen it was called,\par
for it was kept ever shut save at times of funeral, and only the Lord of the\par
City might use that way, or those who bore the token of the tombs and tended\par
the houses of the dead. Beyond it went a winding road that descended in many\par
curves down to the narrow land under the shadow of Mindolluin's precipice\par
where stood the mansions of the dead Kings and of their Stewards.\par
A porter sat in a little house beside the way, and with fear in his eyes\par
he came forth bearing a lantern in his hand. At the Lord's command he unlocked\par
the door, and silently it swung back; and they passed through, taking the\par
lantern from his hand. It was dark on the climbing road between ancient walls\par
and many-pillared balusters looming in the swaying lantern-beam. Their slow\par
feet echoed as they walked down, down, until at last they came to the Silent\par
Street, Rath D\'ednen, between pale domes and empty halls and images of men long\par
dead; and they entered into the House of the Stewards and set down their\par
burden.\par
There Pippin, staring uneasily about him, saw that he was in a wide\par
vaulted chamber, draped as it were with the great shadows that the little\par
lantern threw upon its shrouded walls. And dimly to be seen were many rows of\par
tables, carved of marble; and upon each table lay a sleeping form, hands\par
folded, head pillowed upon stone. But one table near at hand stood broad and\par
bare. Upon it at a sign from Denethor they laid Faramir and his father side by\par
side, and covered them with one covering, and stood then with bowed heads as\par
mourners beside a bed of death. Then Denethor spoke in a low voice.\par
'Here we will wait,' he said. 'But send not for the embalmers. Bring us\par
wood quick to burn, and lay it all about us, and beneath; and pour oil upon\par
it. And when I bid you thrust in a torch. Do this and speak no more to me.\par
Farewell!'\par
'By your leave, lord!' said Pippin and turned and fled in terror from the\par
deathly house. 'Poor Faramir!' he thought. 'I must find Gandalf. Poor Faramir!\par
Quite likely he needs medicine more than tears. Oh, where can I find Gandalf?\par
In the thick of things, I suppose; and he will have no time to spare for dying\par
men or madmen.'\par
At the door he turned to one of the servants who had remained on guard\par
there. 'Your master is not himself,' he said. 'Go slow! Bring no fire to this\par
place while Faramir lives! Do nothing until Gandalf comes!'\par
'Who is the master of Minas Tirith?' the man answered. 'The Lord Denethor\par
or the Grey Wanderer?'\par
'The Grey Wanderer or no one, it would seem,' said Pippin, and he sped\par
back and up the winding way as swiftly as his feet would carry him, past the\par
astonished porter, out through the door, and on, till he came near the gate of\par
the Citadel. The sentinel hailed him as he went by, and he recognized the\par
voice of Beregond.\par
'Whither do you run, Master Peregrin?' he cried.\par
'To find Mithrandir,' Pippin answered.\par
'The Lord's errands are urgent and should not be hindered by me,' said\par
Beregond; 'but tell me quickly, if you may: what goes forward? Whither has my\par
Lord gone? I have just come on duty, but I heard that he passed towards the\par
Closed Door, and men were bearing Faramir before him.'\par
'Yes,' said Pippin, 'to the Silent Street.'\par
Beregond bowed his head to hide his tears. 'They said that he was\par
dying,' he sighed, 'and now he is dead.'\par
'No,' said Pippin, 'not yet. And even now his death might be prevented, I\par
think. But the Lord of the City, Beregond, has fallen before his city is\par
taken. He is fey and dangerous.' Quickly he told of Denethor's strange words\par
and deeds. 'I must find Gandalf at once.'\par
'Then you must go down to the battle.'\par
'I know. The Lord has given me leave. But, Beregond, if you can, do\par
something to stop any dreadful thing happening.'\par
'The Lord does not permit those who wear the black and silver to leave\par
their post for any cause, save at his own command.'\par
'Well, you must choose between orders and the life of Faramir,' said\par
Pippin. 'And as for orders, I think you have a madman to deal with, not a\par
lord. I must run. I will return if I can.'\par
He ran on, down, down towards the outer city. Men flying back from the\par
burning passed him, and some seeing his livery turned and shouted, but he paid\par
no heed. At last he was through the Second Gate, beyond which great fires\par
leaped up between the walls. Yet it seemed strangely silent. No noise or\par
shouts of battle or din of arms could be heard. Then suddenly there was a\par
dreadful cry and a great shock, and a deep echoing boom. Forcing himself on\par
against a gust of fear and horror that shook him almost to his knees. Pippin\par
turned a corner opening on the wide place behind the City Gate. He stopped\par
dead. He had found Gandalf; but he shrank back, cowering into a shadow.\par
Ever since the middle night the great assault had gone on. The drums\par
rolled. To the north and to the south company upon company of the enemy\par
pressed to the walls. There came great beasts, like moving houses in the red\par
and fitful light, the _m\'fbmakil_ of the Harad dragging through the lanes amid\par
the fires huge towers and engines. Yet their Captain cared not greatly what\par
they did or how many might be slain: their purpose was only to test the\par
strength of the defence and to keep the men of Gondor busy in many places. It\par
was against the Gate that he would throw his heaviest weight. Very strong it\par
might be, wrought of steel and iron, and guarded with towers and bastions of\par
indomitable stone, yet it was the key, the weakest point in all that high and\par
impenetrable wall.\par
The drums rolled louder. Fires leaped up. Great engines crawled across\par
the field; and in the midst was a huge ram, great as a forest-tree a hundred\par
feet in length, swinging on mighty chains. Long had it been forging in the\par
dark smithies of Mordor, and its hideous head, founded of black steel, was\par
shaped in the likeness of a ravening wolf; on it spells of ruin lay. Grond\par
they named it, in memory of the Hammer of the Underworld of old. Great beasts\par
drew it, Orcs surrounded it, and behind walked mountain-trolls to wield it.\par
But about the Gate resistance still was stout, and there the knights of\par
Dol Amroth and the hardiest of the garrison stood at bay. Shot and dart fell\par
thick; siege-towers crashed or blazed suddenly like torches. All before the\par
walls on either side of the Gate the ground was choked with wreck and with\par
bodies of the slain; yet still driven as by a madness more and more came up.\par
Grond crawled on. Upon its housing no fire would catch; and though now\par
and again some great beast that hauled it would go mad and spread stamping\par
ruin among the orcs innumerable that guarded it, their bodies were cast aside\par
from its path and others took their place.\par
Grond crawled on. The drums rolled wildly. Over the hills of slain a\par
hideous shape appeared: a horseman, tall, hooded, cloaked in black. Slowly,\par
trampling the fallen, he rode forth, heeding no longer any dart. He halted and\par
held up a long pale sword. And as he did so a great fear fell on all, defender\par
and foe alike; and the hands of men drooped to their sides, and no bow sang.\par
For a moment all was still.\par
The drums rolled and rattled. With a vast rush Grond was hurled forward\par
by huge hands. It reached the Gate. It swung. A deep boom rumbled through the\par
City like thunder running in the clouds. But the doors of iron and posts of\par
steel withstood the stroke.\par
Then the Black Captain rose in his stirrups and cried aloud in a dreadful\par
voice, speaking in some forgotten tongue words of power and terror to rend\par
both heart and stone.\par
Thrice he cried. Thrice the great ram boomed. And suddenly upon the last\par
stroke the Gate of Gondor broke. As if stricken by some blasting spell it\par
burst asunder: there was a flash of searing lightning, and the doors tumbled\par
in riven fragments to the ground.\par
In rode the Lord of the Nazg\'fbl. A great black shape against the fires\par
beyond he loomed up, grown to a vast menace of despair. In rode the Lord of\par
the Nazg\'fbl, under the archway that no enemy ever yet had passed, and all fled\par
before his face.\par
All save one. There waiting, silent and still in the space before the\par
Gate, sat Gandalf upon Shadowfax: Shadowfax who alone among the free horses of\par
the earth endured the terror, unmoving, steadfast as a graven image in Rath\par
D\'ednen.\par
'You cannot enter here,' said Gandalf, and the huge shadow halted. 'Go\par
back to the abyss prepared for you! Go back! Fall into the nothingness that\par
awaits you and your Master. Go!'\par
The Black Rider flung back his hood, and behold! he had a kingly crown;\par
and yet upon no head visible was it set. The red fires shone between it and\par
the mantled shoulders vast and dark. From a mouth unseen there came a deadly\par
laughter.\par
'Old fool!' he said. 'Old fool! This is my hour. Do you not know Death\par
when you see it? Die now and curse in vain!' And with that he lifted high his\par
sword and flames ran down the blade.\par
Gandalf did not move. And in that very moment, away behind in some\par
courtyard of the City, a cock crowed. Shrill and clear he crowed, recking\par
nothing of wizardry or war, welcoming only the morning that in the sky far\par
above the shadows of death was coming with the dawn.\par
And as if in answer there came from far away another note. Horns, horns,\par
horns. In dark Mindolluin's sides they dimly echoed. Great horns of the North\par
wildly blowing. Rohan had come at last.\par
_Chapter 5_\par
The Ride of the Rohirrim\par
It was dark and Merry could see nothing as he lay on the ground rolled in\par
a blanket; yet though the night was airless and windless, all about him hidden\par
trees were sighing softly. He lifted his head. Then he heard it again: a sound\par
like faint drums in the wooded hills and mountain-steps. The throb would cease\par
suddenly and then be taken up again at some other point, now nearer, now\par
further off. He wondered if the watchmen had heard it.\par
He could not see them, but he knew that all round him were the companies\par
of the Rohirrim. He could smell the horses in the dark, and could hear their\par
shiftings and their soft stamping on the needle-covered ground. The host was\par
bivouacked in the pine-woods that clustered about Eilenach Beacon, a tall hill\par
standing up from the long ridges of the Dr\'faadan Forest that lay beside the\par
great road in East An\'f3rien.\par
Tired as he was Merry could not sleep. He had ridden now for four days on\par
end, and the ever-deepening gloom had slowly weighed down his heart. He began\par
to wonder why he had been so eager to come, when he had been given every\par
excuse, even his lord's command, to stay behind. He wondered, too, if the old\par
King knew that he had been disobeyed and was angry. Perhaps not. There seemed\par
to be some understanding between Dernhelm and Elfhelm, the Marshal who\par
commanded the _\'e9ored_ in which they were riding. He and all his men ignored\par
Merry and pretended not to hear if he spoke. He might have been just another\par
bag that Dernhelm was carrying. Dernhelm was no comfort: he never spoke to\par
anyone. Merry felt small, unwanted, and lonely. Now the time was anxious, and\par
the host was in peril. They were less than a day's ride from the out-walls of\par
Minas Tirith that encircled the townlands. Scouts had been sent ahead. Some\par
had not returned. Others hastening back had reported that the road was held in\par
force against them. A host of the enemy was encamped upon it, three miles west\par
of Amon D\'een, and some strength of men was already thrusting along the road and\par
was no more than three leagues away. Orcs were roving in the hills and woods\par
along the roadside. The king and \'c9omer held council in the watches of the\par
night.\par
Merry wanted somebody to talk to, and he thought of Pippin. But that only\par
increased his restlessness. Poor Pippin, shut up in the great city of stone,\par
lonely and afraid. Merry wished he was a tall Rider like \'c9omer and could blow\par
a horn or something and go galloping to his rescue. He sat up, listening to\par
the drums that were beating again, now nearer at hand. Presently he heard\par
voices speaking low, and he saw dim half-shrouded lanterns passing through the\par
trees. Men nearby began to move uncertainly in the dark.\par
A tall figure loomed up and stumbled over him, cursing the tree-roots. He\par
recognized the voice of the Marshal, Elfhelm.\par
'I am not a tree-root, Sir,' he said, 'nor a bag, but a bruised hobbit.\par
The least you can do in amends is to tell me what is afoot.'\par
'Anything that can keep so in this devil's mirk,' answered Elfhelm. 'But\par
my lord sends word that we must set ourselves in readiness: orders may come\par
for a sudden move.'\par
'Is the enemy coming then?' asked Merry anxiously. 'Are those their\par
drums? I began to think I was imagining them, as no one else seemed to take\par
any notice of them.'\par
'Nay, nay,' said Elfhelm, 'the enemy is on the road not in the hills. You\par
hear the Woses, the Wild Men of the Woods: thus they talk together from afar.\par
They still haunt Dr\'faadan Forest, it is said. Remnants of an older time they\par
be, living few and secretly, wild and wary as the beasts. They go not to war\par
with Gondor or the Mark; but now they are troubled by the darkness and the\par
coming of the orcs: they fear lest the Dark Years be returning, as seems\par
likely enough. Let us be thankful that they are not hunting us: for they use\par
poisoned arrows, it is said, and they are woodcrafty beyond compare. But they\par
have offered their services to Th\'e9oden. Even now one of their headmen is being\par
taken to the king. Yonder go the lights. So much I have heard but no more. And\par
now I must busy myself with my lord's commands. Pack yourself up, Master\par
Bag!' He vanished into the shadows.\par
Merry did not like this talk of wild men and poisoned darts, but quite\par
apart from that a great weight of dread was on him. Waiting was unbearable. He\par
longed to know what was going to happen. He got up and soon was walking warily\par
in pursuit of the last lantern before it disappeared among the trees.\par
Presently he came to an open space where a small tent had been set up for\par
the king under a great tree. A large lantern, covered above, was hanging from\par
a bough and cast a pale circle of light below. There sat Th\'e9oden and \'c9omer,\par
and before them on the ground sat a strange squat shape of a man, gnarled as\par
an old stone, and the hairs of his scanty beard straggled on his lumpy chin\par
like dry moss. He was short-legged and fat-armed, thick and stumpy, and clad\par
only with grass about his waist. Merry felt that he had seen him before\par
somewhere, and suddenly he remembered the P\'fakel-men of Dunharrow. Here was one\par
of those old images brought to life, or maybe a creature descended in true\par
line through endless years from the models used by the forgotten craftsmen\par
long ago.\par
There was a silence as Merry crept nearer, and then the Wild Man began to\par
speak, in answer to some question, it seemed. His voice was deep and guttural,\par
yet to Merry's surprise he spoke the Common Speech, though in a halting\par
fashion, and uncouth words were mingled with it.\par
'No, father of Horse-men,' he said, 'we fight not. Hunt only. Kill\par
_gorg\'fbn_ in woods, hate orc-folk. You hate _gorg\'fbn_ too. We help as we can.\par
Wild Men have long ears and long eyes; know all paths. Wild Men live here\par
before Stone-houses; before Tall Men come up out of Water.'\par
'But our need is for aid in battle,' said \'c9omer. 'How will you and your\par
folk help us?'\par
'Bring news,' said the Wild Man. 'We look out from hills. We climb big\par
mountain and look down. Stone-city is shut. Fire burns there outside; now\par
inside too. You wish to come there? Then you must be quick. But _gorg\'fbn_ and\par
men out of far-away,' he waved a short gnarled arm eastward, 'sit on horseroad.\par
Very many, more than Horse-men.'\par
'How do you know that?' said \'c9omer.\par
The old man's flat face and dark eyes showed nothing, but his voice was\par
sullen with displeasure. 'Wild men are wild, free, but not children,' he\par
answered. 'I am great headman, Gh\'e2n-buri-Gh\'e2n. I count many things: stars in\par
sky, leaves on trees, men in the dark. You have a score of scores counted ten\par
times and five. They have more. Big fight, and who will win? And many more\par
walk round walls of Stone-houses.'\par
'Alas! he speaks all too shrewdly,' said Th\'e9oden. 'And our scouts say\par
that they have cast trenches and stakes across the road. We cannot sweep them\par
away in sudden onset.'\par
'And yet we need great haste,' said \'c9omer. 'Mundburg is on fire!'\par
'Let Gh\'e2n-buri-Gh\'e2n finish!' said the Wild Man. 'More than one road he\par
knows. He will lead you by road where no pits are, no _gorg\'fbn_ walk, only Wild\par
Men and beasts. Many paths were made when Stonehouse-folk were stronger. They\par
carved hills as hunters carve beast-flesh. Wild Men think they ate stone for\par
food. They went through Dr\'faadan to Rimmon with great wains. They go no longer.\par
Road is forgotten, but not by Wild Men. Over hill and behind hill it lies\par
still under grass and tree, there behind Rimmon and down to D\'een, and back at\par
the end to Horse-men's road. Wild Men will show you that road. Then you will\par
kill _gorg\'fbn_ and drive away bad dark with bright iron, and Wild Men can go\par
back to sleep in the wild woods.'\par
\'c9omer and the king spoke together in their own tongue. At length Th\'e9oden\par
turned to the Wild Man. 'We will receive your offer,' he said. 'For though we\par
leave a host of foes behind, what matter? If the Stone-city falls, then we\par
shall have no returning. If it is saved, then the orc-host itself will be cut\par
off. If you are faithful, Gh\'e2n-buri-Gh\'e2n, then we will give you rich reward,\par
and you shall have the friendship of the Mark for ever.'\par
'Dead men are not friends to living men, and give them no gifts,' said\par
the Wild Man. 'But if you live after the Darkness, then leave Wild Men alone\par
in the woods and do not hunt them like beasts any more. Gh\'e2n-buri-Gh\'e2n will\par
not lead you into trap. He will go himself with father of Horse-men, and if he\par
leads you wrong, you will kill him.'\par
'So be it!' said Th\'e9oden.\par
'How long will it take to pass by the enemy and come back to the road?'\par
asked \'c9omer. 'We must go at foot-pace, if you guide us; and I doubt not the\par
way is narrow.'\par
'Wild Men go quick on feet,' said Gh\'e2n. 'Way is wide for four horses in\par
Stonewain Valley yonder,' he waved his hand southwards; 'but narrow at\par
beginning and at end. Wild Man could walk from here to D\'een between sunrise and\par
noon.'\par
'Then we must allow at least seven hours for the leaders,' said \'c9omer;\par
'but we must reckon rather on some ten hours for all. Things unforeseen may\par
hinder us, and if our host is all strung out, it will be long ere it can be\par
set in order when we issue from the hills. What is the hour now?'\par
'Who knows?' said Th\'e9oden. 'All is night now.'\par
'It is all dark, but it is not all night.' said Gh\'e2n. 'When Sun comes we\par
feel her, even when she is hidden. Already she climbs over East-mountains. It\par
is the opening of day in the sky-fields.'\par
'Then we must set out as soon as may be,' said \'c9omer. 'Even so we cannot\par
hope to come to Gondor's aid today.'\par
Merry waited to hear no more, but slipped away to get ready for the\par
summons to the march. This was the last stage before the battle. It did not\par
seem likely to him that many of them would survive it. But he thought of\par
Pippin and the flames in Minas Tirith and thrust down his own dread.\par
All went well that day, and no sight or sound had they of the enemy\par
waiting to waylay them. The Wild Men had put out a screen of wary hunters, so\par
that no orc or roving spy should learn of the movements in the hills. The\par
light was more dim than ever as they drew nearer to the beleaguered city, and\par
the Riders passed in long files like dark shadows of men and horses. Each\par
company was guided by a wild woodman; but old Gh\'e2n walked beside the king. The\par
start had been slower than was hoped, for it had taken time for the Riders,\par
walking and leading their horses, to find paths over the thickly wooded ridges\par
behind their camp and down into the hidden Stonewain Valley. It was late in\par
the afternoon when the leaders came to wide grey thickets stretching beyond\par
the eastward side of Amon D\'een, and masking a great gap in the line of hills\par
that from Nardol to D\'een ran east and west. Through the gap the forgotten wainroad\par
long ago had run down, back into the main horse-way from the City through\par
An\'f3rien; but now for many lives of men trees had had their way with it, and it\par
had vanished, broken and buried under the leaves of uncounted years. But the\par
thickets offered to the Riders their last hope of cover before they went into\par
open battle; for beyond them lay the road and the plains of Anduin, while east\par
and southwards the slopes were bare and rocky, as the writhen hills gathered\par
themselves together and climbed up, bastion upon bastion, into the great mass\par
and shoulders of Mindolluin.\par
The leading company was halted, and as those behind filed up out of the\par
trough of the Stonewain Valley they spread out and passed to camping-places\par
under the grey trees. The king summoned the captains to council. \'c9omer sent\par
out scouts to spy upon the road; but old Gh\'e2n shook his head.\par
'No good to send Horse-men,' he said. 'Wild Men have already seen all\par
that can be seen in the bad air. They will come soon and speak to me here.'\par
The captains came; and then out of the trees crept warily other p\'fakelshapes\par
so like old Gh\'e2n that Merry could hardly tell them apart. They spoke to\par
Gh\'e2n in a strange throaty language.\par
Presently Gh\'e2n turned to the king. 'Wild Men say many things ' he said.\par
'First, be wary! Still many men in camp beyond D\'een, an hour's walk yonder,' he\par
waved his arm west towards the black beacon. 'But none to see between here and\par
Stone-folk's new walls. Many busy there. Walls stand up no longer: _gorg\'fbn_\par
knock them down with earth-thunder and with clubs of black iron. They are\par
unwary and do not look about them. They think their friends watch all roads!'\par
At that old Gh\'e2n made a curious gurgling noise, and it seemed that he was\par
laughing.\par
'Good tidings!' cried \'c9omer. 'Even in this gloom hope gleams again. Our\par
Enemy's devices oft serve us in his despite. The accursed darkness itself has\par
been a cloak to us. And now, lusting to destroy Gondor and throw it down stone\par
from stone, his orcs have taken away my greatest fear. The out-wall could have\par
been held long against us. Now we can sweep through \endash  if once we win so far.'\par
'Once again I thank you, Gh\'e2n-buri-Gh\'e2n of the woods,' said Th\'e9oden.\par
'Good fortune go with you for tidings and for guidance!'\par
'Kill _gorg\'fbn_! Kill orc-folk! No other words please Wild Men ' answered\par
Gh\'e2n. 'Drive away bad air and darkness with bright iron!'\par
'To do these things we have ridden far,' said the king, 'and we shall\par
attempt them. But what we shall achieve only tomorrow will show.'\par
Gh\'e2n-buri-Gh\'e2n squatted down and touched the earth with his horny brow in\par
token of farewell. Then he got up as if to depart. But suddenly he stood\par
looking up like some startled woodland animal snuffling a strange air. A light\par
came in his eyes.\par
'Wind is changing!' he cried, and with that, in a twinkling as it seemed,\par
he and his fellows had vanished into the glooms, never to be seen by any Rider\par
of Rohan again. Not long after far away eastward the faint drums throbbed\par
again. Yet to no heart in all the host came any fear that the Wild Men were\par
unfaithful, strange and unlovely though they might appear.\par
'We need no further guidance,' said Elfhelm; 'for there are riders in the\par
host who have ridden down to Mundburg in days of peace. I for one. When we\par
come to the road it will veer south, and there will lie before us still seven\par
leagues ere we reach the wall of the townlands. Along most of that way there\par
is much grass on either side of the road. On that stretch the errand-riders of\par
Gondor reckoned to make their greatest speed. We may ride it swiftly and\par
without great rumour.'\par
'Then since we must look for fell deeds and the need of all our\par
strength,' said \'c9omer, 'I counsel that we rest now, and set out hence by\par
night, and so time our going that we come upon the fields when tomorrow is as\par
light as it will be, or when our lord gives the signal.'\par
To this the king assented, and the captains departed. But soon Elfhelm\par
returned. 'The scouts have found naught to report beyond the grey wood,\par
lord,' he said, 'save two men only: two dead men and two dead horses.'\par
'Well?' said \'c9omer. 'What of it?'\par
'This, lord: they were errand-riders of Gondor; Hirgon was one maybe. At\par
least his hand still clasped the Red Arrow, but his head was hewn off. And\par
this also: it would seem by the signs that they were fleeing _westward_ when\par
they fell. As I read it, they found the enemy already on the out-wall, or\par
assailing it, when they returned \endash  and that would be two nights ago, if they\par
used fresh horses from the posts, as is their wont. They could not reach the\par
City and turned back.'\par
'Alas!' said Th\'e9oden. 'Then Denethor has heard no news of our riding and\par
will despair of our coming.'\par
'_Need brooks no delay, yet late is better than never_,' said \'c9omer. 'And\par
mayhap in this time shall the old saw be proved truer than ever before since\par
men spoke with mouth.'\par
It was night. On either side of the road the host of Rohan was moving\par
silently. Now the road passing about the skirts of Mindolluin turned\par
southward. Far away and almost straight ahead there was a red glow under the\par
black sky and the sides of the great mountain loomed dark against it. They\par
were drawing near the Rammas of the Pelennor; but the day was not yet come.\par
The king rode in the midst of the leading company, his household-men\par
about him. Elfhelm's _\'e9ored_ came next; and now Merry noticed that Dernhelm\par
had left his place and in the darkness was moving steadily forward, until at\par
last he was riding just in rear of the king's guard. There came a check. Merry\par
heard voices in front speaking softly. Out-riders had come back who had\par
ventured forward almost to the wall. They came to the king.\par
'There are great fires, lord,' said one. 'The City is all set about with\par
flame, and the field is full of foes. But all seem drawn off to the assault.\par
As well as we could guess, there are few left upon the out-wall, and they are\par
heedless, busy in destruction.'\par
'Do you remember the Wild Man's words, lord?' said another. 'I live upon\par
the open Wold in days of peace; W\'eddfara is my name, and to me also the air\par
brings messages. Already the wind is turning. There comes a breath out of the\par
South; there is a sea-tang in it, faint though it be. The morning will bring\par
new things. Above the reek it will be dawn when you pass the wall.'\par
'If you speak truly, W\'eddfara, then may you live beyond this day in years\par
of blessedness!' said Th\'e9oden. He turned to the men of his household who were\par
near, and he spoke now in a clear voice so that many also of the riders of the\par
first _\'e9ored_ heard him:\par
'Now is the hour come, Riders of the Mark, sons of Eorl! Foes and fire\par
are before you, and your homes far behind. Yet, though you fight upon an alien\par
field, the glory that you reap there shall be your own for ever. Oaths ye have\par
taken: now fulfil them all, to lord and land and league of friendship!'\par
Men clashed spear upon shield.\par
'\'c9omer, my son! You lead the first _\'e9ored_,' said Th\'e9oden; 'and it shall\par
go behind the king's banner in the centre. Elfhelm, lead your company to the\par
right when we pass the wall. And Grimbold shall lead his towards the left. Let\par
the other companies behind follow these three that lead, as they have chance.\par
Strike wherever the enemy gathers. Other plans we cannot make, for we know not\par
yet how things stand upon the field. Forth now, and fear no darkness!'\par
The leading company rode off as swiftly as they could, for it was still\par
deep dark, whatever change W\'eddfara might forebode. Merry was riding behind\par
Dernhelm, clutching with the left hand while with the other he tried to loosen\par
his sword in its sheath. He felt now bitterly the truth of the old king's\par
words: _in such a battle what would you do Meriadoc?_ Just this,' he thought:\par
'encumber a rider, and hope at best to stay in my seat and not be pounded to\par
death by galloping hoofs!'\par
It was no more than a league to where the out-walls had stood. They soon\par
reached them; too soon for Merry. Wild cries broke out, and there was some\par
clash of arms, but it was brief. The orcs busy about the walls were few and\par
amazed, and they were quickly slain or driven off. Before the ruin of the\par
north-gate in the Rammas the king halted again. The first _\'e9ored_ drew up\par
behind him and about him on either side. Dernhelm kept close to the king,\par
though Elfhelm's company was away on the right. Grimbold's men turned aside\par
and passed round to a great gap in the wall further eastward.\par
Merry peered from behind Dernhelm's back. Far away, maybe ten miles or\par
more, there was a great burning, but between it and the Riders lines of fire\par
blazed in a vast crescent, at the nearest point less than a league distant. He\par
could make out little more on the dark plain, and as yet he neither saw any\par
hope of morning, nor felt any wind, changed or unchanged.\par
Now silently the host of Rohan moved forward into the field of Gondor,\par
pouring in slowly but steadily, like the rising tide through breaches in a\par
dike that men have thought secure. But the mind and will of the Black Captain\par
were bent wholly on the falling city, and as yet no tidings came to him\par
warning that his designs held any flaw.\par
After a while the king led his men away somewhat eastward, to come\par
between the fires of the siege and the outer fields. Still they were\par
unchallenged, and still Th\'e9oden gave no signal. At last he halted once again.\par
The City was now nearer. A smell of burning was in the air and a very shadow\par
of death. The horses were uneasy. But the king sat upon Snowmane, motionless,\par
gazing upon the agony of Minas Tirith, as if stricken suddenly by anguish, or\par
by dread. He seemed to shrink down, cowed by age. Merry himself felt as if a\par
great weight of horror and doubt had settled on him. His heart beat slowly.\par
Time seemed poised in uncertainty. They were too late! Too late was worse than\par
never! Perhaps Th\'e9oden would quail, bow his old head, turn, slink away to hide\par
in the hills.\par
Then suddenly Merry felt it at last, beyond doubt: a change. Wind was in\par
his face! Light was glimmering. Far, far away, in the South the clouds could\par
be dimly seen as remote grey shapes, rolling up, drifting: morning lay beyond\par
them.\par
But at that same moment there was a flash, as if lightning had sprung\par
from the earth beneath the City. For a searing second it stood dazzling far\par
off in black and white, its topmost tower like a glittering needle: and then\par
as the darkness closed again there came rolling over the fields a great\par
_boom_.\par
At that sound the bent shape of the king sprang suddenly erect. Tall and\par
proud he seemed again; and rising in his stirrups he cried in a loud voice,\par
more clear than any there had ever heard a mortal man achieve before:\par
Arise, arise, Riders of Th\'e9oden!\par
Fell deeds awake: fire and slaughter!\par
spear shall be shaken, shield be splintered,\par
a sword-day, a red day, ere the sun rises!\par
Ride now, ride now! Ride to Gondor!\par
With that he seized a great horn from Guthl\'e1f his banner-bearer, and he\par
blew such a blast upon it that it burst asunder. And straightway all the horns\par
in the host were lifted up in music, and the blowing of the horns of Rohan in\par
that hour was like a storm upon the plain and a thunder in the mountains.\par
Ride now, ride now! Ride to Gondor!\par
Suddenly the king cried to Snowmane and the horse sprang away. Behind him\par
his banner blew in the wind, white horse upon a field of green, but he\par
outpaced it. After him thundered the knights of his house, but he was ever\par
before them. \'c9omer rode there, the white horsetail on his helm floating in his\par
speed, and the front of the first _\'e9ored_ roared like a breaker foaming to the\par
shore, but Th\'e9oden could not be overtaken. Fey he seemed, or the battle-fury\par
of his fathers ran like new tire in his veins, and he was borne up on Snowmane\par
like a god of old, even as Orom\'eb the Great in the battle of the Valar when the\par
world was young. His golden shield was uncovered, and lo! it shone like an\par
image of the Sun, and the grass flamed into green about the white feet of his\par
steed. For morning came, morning and a wind from the sea; and the darkness was\par
removed, and the hosts of Mordor wailed, and terror took them, and they fled,\par
and died, and the hoofs of wrath rode over them. And then all the host of\par
Rohan burst into song, and they sang as they slew, for the joy of battle was\par
on them, and the sound of their singing that was fair and terrible came even\par
to the City.\par
_Chapter 6_\par
The Battle of the Pelennor Fields\par
But it was no orc-chieftain or brigand that led the assault upon Gondor.\par
The darkness was breaking too soon, before the date that his Master had set\par
for it: fortune had betrayed him for the moment, and the world had turned\par
against him; victory was slipping from his grasp even as he stretched out his\par
hand to seize it. But his arm was long. He was still in command, wielding\par
great powers. King, Ringwraith, Lord of the Nazg\'fbl, he had many weapons. He\par
left the Gate and vanished.\par
Th\'e9oden King of the Mark had reached the road from the Gate to the River,\par
and he turned towards the City that was now less than a mile distant. He\par
slackened his speed a little, seeking new foes, and his knights came about\par
him, and Dernhelm was with them. Ahead nearer the walls Elfhelm's men were\par
among the siege-engines, hewing, slaying, driving their foes into the firepits.\par
Well nigh all the northern half of the Pelennor was overrun, and there\par
camps were blazing, orcs were flying towards the River like herds before the\par
hunters; and the Rohirrim went hither and thither at their will. But they had\par
not yet overthrown the siege, nor won the Gate. Many foes stood before it, and\par
on the further half of the plain were other hosts still unfought. Southward\par
beyond the road lay the main force of the Haradrim, and there their horsemen\par
were gathered about the standard of their chieftain. And he looked out, and in\par
the growing light he saw the banner of the king, and that it was far ahead of\par
the battle with few men about it. Then he was filled with a red wrath and\par
shouted aloud, and displaying his standard, black serpent upon scarlet, he\par
came against the white horse and the green with great press of men; and the\par
drawing of the scimitars of the Southrons was like a glitter of stars.\par
Then Th\'e9oden was aware of him, and would not wait for his onset, but\par
crying to Snowmane he charged headlong to greet him. Great was the clash of\par
their meeting. But the white fury of the Northmen burned the hotter, and more\par
skilled was their knighthood with long spears and bitter. Fewer were they but\par
they clove through the Southrons like a fire-bolt in a forest. Right through\par
the press drove Th\'e9oden Thengel's son, and his spear was shivered as he threw\par
down their chieftain. Out swept his sword, and he spurred to the standard,\par
hewed staff and bearer; and the black serpent foundered. Then all that was\par
left unslain of their cavalry turned and fled far away.\par
But lo! suddenly in the midst of the glory of the king his golden shield\par
was dimmed. The new morning was blotted from the sky. Dark fell about him.\par
Horses reared and screamed. Men cast from the saddle lay grovelling on the\par
ground.\par
'To me! To me!' cried Th\'e9oden. 'Up Eorlingas! Fear no darkness!' But\par
Snowmane wild with terror stood up on high, fighting with the air, and then\par
with a great scream he crashed upon his side: a black dart had pierced him.\par
The king fell beneath him.\par
The great shadow descended like a falling cloud. And behold! it was a\par
winged creature: if bird, then greater than all other birds, and it was naked,\par
and neither quill nor feather did it bear, and its vast pinions were as webs\par
of hide between horned fingers; and it stank. A creature of an older world\par
maybe it was, whose kind, fingering in forgotten mountains cold beneath the\par
Moon, outstayed their day, and in hideous eyrie bred this last untimely brood,\par
apt to evil. And the Dark Lord took it, and nursed it with fell meats, until\par
it grew beyond the measure of all other things that fly; and he gave it to his\par
servant to be his steed. Down, down it came, and then, folding its fingered\par
webs, it gave a croaking cry, and settled upon the body of Snowmane, digging\par
in its claws, stooping its long naked neck.\par
Upon it sat a shape, black-mantled, huge and threatening. A crown of\par
steel he bore, but between rim and robe naught was there to see, save only a\par
deadly gleam of eyes: the Lord of the Nazg\'fbl. To the air he had returned,\par
summoning his steed ere the darkness failed, and now he was come again,\par
bringing ruin, turning hope to despair, and victory to death. A great black\par
mace he wielded.\par
But Th\'e9oden was not utterly forsaken. The knights of his house lay slain\par
about him, or else mastered by the madness of their steeds were borne far\par
away. Yet one stood there still: Dernhelm the young, faithful beyond fear; and\par
he wept, for he had loved his lord as a father. Right through the charge Merry\par
had been borne unharmed behind him, until the Shadow came; and then Windfola\par
had thrown them in his terror, and now ran wild upon the plain. Merry crawled\par
on all fours like a dazed beast, and such a horror was on him that he was\par
blind and sick.\par
'King's man! King's man!' his heart cried within him. 'You must stay by\par
him. As a father you shall be to me, you said.' But his will made no answer,\par
and his body shook. He dared not open his eyes or look up.\par
Then out of the blackness in his mind he thought that he heard Dernhelm\par
speaking; yet now the voice seemed strange, recalling some other voice that he\par
had known.\par
'Begone, foul dwimmerlaik, lord of carrion! Leave the dead in peace!'\par
A cold voice answered: 'Come not between the Nazg\'fbl and his prey! Or he\par
will not slay thee in thy turn. He will bear thee away to the houses of\par
lamentation, beyond all darkness, where thy flesh shall be devoured, and thy\par
shrivelled mind be left naked to the Lidless Eye.'\par
A sword rang as it was drawn. 'Do what you will; but I will hinder it, if\par
I may.'\par
'Hinder me? Thou fool. No living man may hinder me!'\par
Then Merry heard of all sounds in that hour the strangest. It seemed that\par
Dernhelm laughed, and the clear voice was like the ring of steel. 'But no\par
living man am I! You look upon a woman. \'c9owyn I am, \'c9omund's daughter. You\par
stand between me and my lord and kin. Begone, if you be not deathless! For\par
living or dark undead, I will smite you, if you touch him.'\par
The winged creature screamed at her, but the Ringwraith made no answer,\par
and was silent, as if in sudden doubt. Very amazement for a moment conquered\par
Merry's fear. He opened his eyes and the blackness was lifted from them. There\par
some paces from him sat the great beast, and all seemed dark about it, and\par
above it loomed the Nazg\'fbl Lord like a shadow of despair. A little to the left\par
facing them stood she whom he had called Dernhelm. But the helm of her\par
secrecy, had fallen from her, and her bright hair, released from its bonds,\par
gleamed with pale gold upon her shoulders. Her eyes grey as the sea were hard\par
and fell, and yet tears were on her cheek. A sword was in her hand, and she\par
raised her shield against the horror of her enemy's eyes.\par
\'c9owyn it was, and Dernhelm also. For into Merry's mind flashed the memory\par
of the face that he saw at the riding from Dunharrow: the face of one that\par
goes seeking death, having no hope. Pity filled his heart and great wonder,\par
and suddenly the slow-kindled courage of his race awoke. He clenched his hand.\par
She should not die, so fair, so desperate At least she should not die alone,\par
unaided.\par
The face of their enemy was not turned towards him, but still he hardly\par
dared to move, dreading lest the deadly eyes should fall on him. Slowly,\par
slowly he began to crawl aside; but the Black Captain, in doubt and malice\par
intent upon the woman before him, heeded him no more than a worm in the mud.\par
Suddenly the great beast beat its hideous wings, and the wind of them was\par
foul. Again it leaped into the air, and then swiftly fell down upon \'c9owyn,\par
shrieking, striking with beak and claw.\par
Still she did not blench: maiden of the Rohirrim, child of kings, slender\par
but as a steel-blade, fair but terrible. A swift stroke she dealt, skilled and\par
deadly. The outstretched neck she clove asunder, and the hewn head fell like a\par
stone. Backward she sprang as the huge shape crashed to ruin, vast wings\par
outspread, crumpled on the earth; and with its fall the shadow passed away. A\par
light fell about her, and her hair shone in the sunrise.\par
Out of the wreck rose the Black Rider, tall and threatening, towering\par
above her. With a cry of hatred that stung the very ears like venom he let\par
fall his mace. Her shield was shivered in many pieces, and her arm was broken;\par
she stumbled to her knees. He bent over her like a cloud, and his eyes\par
glittered; he raised his mace to kill.\par
But suddenly he too stumbled forward with a cry of bitter pain, and his\par
stroke went wide, driving into the ground. Merry's sword had stabbed him from\par
behind, shearing through the black mantle, and passing up beneath the hauberk\par
had pierced the sinew behind his mighty knee.\par
'\'c9owyn! \'c9owyn!' cried Merry. Then tottering, struggling up, with her last\par
strength she drove her sword between crown and mantle, as the great shoulders\par
bowed before her. The sword broke sparkling into many shards. The crown rolled\par
away with a clang. \'c9owyn fell forward upon her fallen foe. But lo! the mantle\par
and hauberk were empty. Shapeless they lay now on the ground, torn and\par
tumbled; and a cry went up into the shuddering air, and faded to a shrill\par
wailing, passing with the wind, a voice bodiless and thin that died, and was\par
swallowed up, and was never heard again in that age of this world.\par
And there stood Meriadoc the hobbit in the midst of the slain, blinking\par
like an owl in the daylight, for tears blinded him; and through a mist he\par
looked on \'c9owyn's fair head, as she lay and did not move; and he looked on the\par
face of the king, fallen in the midst of his glory, For Snowmane in his agony\par
had rolled away from him again; yet he was the bane of his master.\par
Then Merry stooped and lifted his hand to kiss it, and lo! Th\'e9oden opened\par
his eyes, and they were clear, and he spoke in a quiet voice though laboured.\par
'Farewell, Master Holbytla!' he said. 'My body is broken. I go to my\par
fathers. And even in their mighty company I shall not now be ashamed. I felled\par
the black serpent. A grim morn, and a glad day, and a golden sunset!'\par
Merry could not speak, but wept anew. 'Forgive me, lord,' he said at\par
last, 'if I broke your command, and yet have done no more in your service than\par
to weep at our parting.'\par
The old king smiled. 'Grieve not! It is forgiven. Great heart will not be\par
denied. Live now in blessedness; and when you sit in peace with your pipe,\par
think of me! For never now shall I sit with you in Meduseld, as I promised, or\par
listen to your herb-lore.' He closed his eyes, and Merry bowed beside him.\par
Presently he spoke again. 'Where is \'c9omer? For my eyes darken, and I would see\par
him ere I go. He must be king after me. And I would send word to \'c9owyn. She,\par
she would not have me leave her, and now I shall not see her again, dearer\par
than daughter.'\par
'Lord, lord,' began Merry brokenly, 'she is-'; but at that moment there\par
was a great clamour, and all about them horns and trumpets were blowing. Merry\par
looked round: he had forgotten the war, and all the world beside, and many\par
hours it seemed since the king rode to his fall, though in truth it was only a\par
little while. But now he saw that they were in danger of being caught in the\par
very midst of the great battle that would soon be joined.\par
New forces of the enemy were hastening up the road from the River; and\par
from under the walls came the legions of Morgul; and from the southward fields\par
came footmen of Harad with horsemen before them, and behind them rose the huge\par
backs of the _m\'fbmakil_ with war-towers upon them. But northward the white\par
crest of \'c9omer led the great front of the Rohirrim which he had again gathered\par
and marshalled; and out of the City came all the strength of men that was in\par
it, and the silver swan of Dol Amroth was borne in the van, driving the enemy\par
from the Gate.\par
For a moment the thought flitted through Merry's mind: 'Where is Gandalf?\par
Is he not here? Could he not have saved the king and \'c9owyn?' But thereupon\par
\'c9omer rode up in haste, and with him came the knights of the household that\par
still lived and had now mastered their horses. They looked in wonder at the\par
carcase of the fell beast that lay there: and their steeds would not go near.\par
But \'c9omer leaped from the saddle, and grief and dismay fell upon him as he\par
came to the king's side and stood there in silence.\par
Then one of the knights took the king's banner from the hand of Guthl\'e1f\par
the banner-bearer who lay dead, and he lifted it up. Slowly Th\'e9oden opened his\par
eyes. Seeing the banner he made a sign that it should be given to \'c9omer.\par
'Hail, King of the Mark!' he said. 'Ride now to victory! Bid \'c9owyn\par
farewell!' And so he died, and knew not that \'c9owyn lay near him. And those who\par
stood by wept, crying: 'Th\'e9oden King! Th\'e9oden King!'\par
But \'c9omer said to them:\par
Mourn not overmuch! Mighty was the fallen,\par
meet was his ending. When his mound is raised,\par
women then shall weep. War now calls us!\par
Yet he himself wept as he spoke. 'Let his knights remain here,' he said;\par
'and bear his body in honour from the field, lest the battle ride over it!\par
Yea, and all these other of the king's men that lie here.' And he looked at\par
the slain, recalling their names. Then suddenly he beheld his sister \'c9owyn as\par
she lay, and he knew her. He stood a moment as a man who is pierced in the\par
midst of a cry by an arrow through the heart; and then his face went deathly\par
white; and a cold fury rose in him, so that all speech failed him for a while.\par
A fey mood took him.\par
'\'c9owyn, \'c9owyn!' he cried at last: '\'c9owyn, how come you here? What madness\par
or devilry is this? Death, death, death! Death take us all!'\par
Then without taking counsel or waiting for the approach of the men of the\par
City, he spurred headlong back to the front of the great host, and blew a\par
horn, and cried aloud for the onset. Over the field rang his clear voice\par
calling: 'Death! Ride, ride to ruin and the world's ending!'\par
And with that the host began to move. But the Rohirrim sang no more.\par
_Death_ they cried with one voice loud and terrible, and gathering speed like\par
a great tide their battle swept about their fallen king and passed, roaring\par
away southwards.\par
And still Meriadoc the hobbit stood there blinking through his tears and\par
no one spoke to him, indeed none seemed to heed him. He brushed away the\par
tears, and stooped to pick up the green shield that \'c9owyn had given him; and\par
he slung it at his back. Then he looked for his sword that he had let fall;\par
for even as he struck his blow his arm was numbed, and now he could only use\par
his left hand. And behold! there lay his weapon, but the blade was smoking\par
like a dry branch that has been thrust in a fire; and as he watched it, it\par
writhed and withered and was consumed.\par
So passed the sword of the Barrow-downs, work of Westernesse. But glad\par
would he have been to know its fate who wrought it slowly long ago in the\par
North-kingdom when the D\'fanedain were young, and chief among their foes was the\par
dread realm of Angmar and its sorcerer king. No other blade, not though\par
mightier hands had wielded it, would have dealt that foe a wound so bitter,\par
cleaving the undead flesh, breaking the spell that knit his unseen sinews to\par
his will.\par
Men now raised the king, and laying cloaks upon spear-truncheons they\par
made shift to bear him away towards the City; and others lifted \'c9owyn gently\par
up and bore her after him. But the men of the king's household they could not\par
yet bring from the field; for seven of the king's knights had fallen there,\par
and D\'e9orwine their chief was among them. So they laid them apart from their\par
foes and the fell beast and set spears about them. And afterwards when all was\par
over men returned and made a fire there and burned the carcase of the beast;\par
but for Snowmane they dug a grave and set up a stone upon which was carved in\par
the tongues of Gondor and the Mark:\par
Faithful servant yet master's bane\par
Lightfoot's foal, swift Snowmane.\par
Green and long grew the grass on Snowmane's Howe, but ever black and bare\par
was the ground where the beast was burned.\par
Now slowly and sadly Merry walked beside the bearers, and he gave no more\par
heed to the battle. He was weary and full of pain, and his limbs trembled as\par
with a chill. A great rain came out of the Sea, and it seemed that all things\par
wept for Th\'e9oden and \'c9owyn, quenching the fires in the City with grey tears.\par
It was through a mist that presently he saw the van of the men of Gondor\par
approaching. Imrahil, Prince of Dol Amroth, rode up and drew rein before them.\par
'What burden do you bear, Men of Rohan?' he cried.\par
'Th\'e9oden King,' they answered. 'He is dead. But \'c9omer King now rides in\par
the battle: he with the white crest in the wind.'\par
Then the prince went from his horse, and knelt by the bier in honour of\par
the king and his great onset; and he wept. And rising he looked then on \'c9owyn\par
and was amazed. 'Surely, here is a woman?' he said. 'Have even the women of\par
the Rohirrim come to war in our need?'\par
'Nay! One only,' they answered. 'The Lady \'c9owyn is she, sister of \'c9omer;\par
and we knew naught of her riding until this hour, and greatly we rue it.'\par
Then the prince seeing her beauty, though her face was pale and cold,\par
touched her hand as he bent to look more closely on her. 'Men of Rohan!' he\par
cried. 'Are there no leeches among you? She is hurt to the death maybe, but I\par
deem that she yet lives.' And he held the bright-burnished vambrace that was\par
upon his arm before her cold tips, and behold! a little mist was laid on it\par
hardly to be seen.\par
'Haste now is needed,' he said, and he sent one riding back swiftly to\par
the City to bring aid. But he bowing low to the fallen, bade them farewell,\par
and mounting rode away into battle.\par
And now the fighting waxed furious on the fields of the Pelennor; and the\par
din of arms rose upon high, with the crying of men and the neighing of horses.\par
Horns were blown and trumpets were braying, and the _m\'fbmakil_ were bellowing\par
as they were goaded to war. Under the south walls of the City the footmen of\par
Gondor now drove against the legions of Morgul that were still gathered there\par
in strength. But the horsemen rode eastward to the succour of \'c9omer: H\'farin the\par
Tall Warden of the Keys, and the Lord of Lossarnach, and Hirluin of the Green\par
Hills, and Prince Imrahil the fair with his knights all about him.\par
Not too soon came their aid to the Rohirrim; for fortune had turned\par
against \'c9omer, and his fury had betrayed him. The great wrath of his onset had\par
utterly overthrown the front of his enemies, and great wedges of his Riders\par
had passed clear through the ranks of the Southrons, discomfiting their\par
horsemen and riding their footmen to ruin. But wherever the _m\'fbmakil_ came\par
there the horses would not go, but blenched and swerved away; and the great\par
monsters were unfought, and stood like towers of defence, and the Haradrim\par
rallied about them. And if the Rohirrim at their onset were thrice outnumbered\par
by the Haradrim alone, soon their case became worse; for new strength came now\par
streaming to the field out of Osgiliath. There they had been mustered for the\par
sack of the City and the rape of Gondor, waiting on the call of their Captain.\par
He now was destroyed; but Gothmog the lieutenant of Morgul had flung them into\par
the fray; Easterlings with axes, and Variags of Khand. Southrons in scarlet,\par
and out of Far Harad black men like half-trolls with white eyes and red\par
tongues. Some now hastened up behind the Rohirrim, others held westward to\par
hold off the forces of Gondor and prevent their joining with Rohan.\par
It was even as the day thus began to turn against Gondor and their hope\par
wavered that a new cry went up in the City, it being then midmorning, and a\par
great wind blowing, and the rain flying north, and the sun shining. In that\par
clear air watchmen on the walls saw afar a new sight of fear, and their last\par
hope left them.\par
For Anduin, from the bend at the Harlond, so flowed that from the City\par
men could look down it lengthwise for some leagues, and the far-sighted could\par
see any ships that approached. And looking thither they cried in dismay; for\par
black against the glittering stream they beheld a fleet borne up on the wind:\par
dromunds, and ships of great draught with many oars, and with black sails\par
bellying in the breeze.\par
'The Corsairs of Umbar!' men shouted. 'The Corsairs of Umbar! Look! The\par
Corsairs of Umbar are coming! So Belfalas is taken, and the Ethir, and\par
Lebennin is gone. The Corsairs are upon us! It is the last stroke of doom!'\par
And some without order, for none could he found to command them in the\par
City, ran to the bells and tolled the alarm; and some blew the trumpets\par
sounding the retreat. 'Back to the walls!' they cried. 'Back to the walls!\par
Come back to the City before all are overwhelmed!' But the wind that sped the\par
ships blew all their clamour away.\par
The Rohirrim indeed had no need of news or alarm. All too well they could\par
see for themselves the black sails. For \'c9omer was now scarcely a mile from the\par
Harlond, and a great press of his first foes was between him and the haven\par
there, while new foes came swirling behind, cutting him off from the Prince.\par
Now he looked to the River, and hope died in his heart, and the wind that he\par
had blessed he now called accursed. But the hosts of Mordor were enheartened,\par
and filled with a new lust and fury they came yelling to the onset.\par
Stern now was \'c9omer's mood, and his mind clear again. He let blow the\par
horns to rally all men to his banner that could come thither; for he thought\par
to make a great shield-wall at the last, and stand, and fight there on foot\par
till all fell, and do deeds of song on the fields of Pelennor, though no man\par
should be left in the West to remember the last King of the Mark. So he rode\par
to a green hillock and there set his banner, and the White Horse ran rippling\par
in the wind.\par
Out of doubt, out of dark to the day's rising\par
I came singing in the sun, sword unsheathing.\par
To hope's end I rode and to heart's breaking:\par
Now for wrath, now for ruin and a red nightfall!\par
These staves he spoke, yet he laughed as he said them. For once more lust\par
of battle was on him; and he was still unscathed, and he was young, and he was\par
king: the lord of a fell people. And lo! even as he laughed at despair he\par
looked out again on the black ships, and he lifted up his sword to defy them.\par
And then wonder took him, and a great joy; and he cast his sword up in\par
the sunlight and sang as he caught it. And all eyes followed his gaze, and\par
behold! upon the foremost ship a great standard broke, and the wind displayed\par
it as she turned towards the Harlond. There flowered a White Tree, and that\par
was for Gondor; but Seven Stars were about it, and a high crown above it, the\par
signs of Elendil that no lord had borne for years beyond count. And the stars\par
flamed in the sunlight, for they were wrought of gems by Arwen daughter of\par
Elrond; and the crown was bright in the morning, for it was wrought of mithril\par
and gold.\par
Thus came Aragorn son of Arathorn, Elessar, Isildur's heir, out of the\par
Paths of the Dead, borne upon a wind from the Sea to the kingdom of Gondor;\par
and the mirth of the Rohirrim was a torrent of laughter and a flashing of\par
swords, and the joy and wonder of the City was a music of trumpets and a\par
ringing of bells. But the hosts of Mordor were seized with bewilderment, and a\par
great wizardry it seemed to them that their own ships should be filled with\par
their foes; and a black dread fell on them, knowing that the tides of fate had\par
turned against them and their doom was at hand.\par
East rode the knights of Dol Amroth driving the enemy before them: trollmen\par
and Variags and orcs that hated the sunlight. South strode \'c9omer and men\par
fled before his face, and they were caught between the hammer and the anvil.\par
For now men leaped from the ships to the quays of the Harlond and swept north\par
like a storm. There came Legolas, and Gimli wielding his axe, and Halbarad\par
with the standard, and Elladan and Elrohir with stars on their brow, and the\par
dour-handed D\'fanedain, Rangers of the North, leading a great valour of the folk\par
of Lebennin and Lamedon and the fiefs of the South. But before all went\par
Aragorn with the Flame of the West, And\'faril like a new fire kindled, Narsil\par
re-forged as deadly as of old: and upon his brow was the Star of Elendil.\par
And so at length \'c9omer and Aragorn met in the midst of the battle, and\par
they leaned on their swords and looked on one another and were glad.\par
'Thus we meet again, though all the hosts of Mordor lay between us,' said\par
Aragorn. 'Did I not say so at the Hornburg?'\par
'So you spoke,' said \'c9omer, 'but hope oft deceives, and I knew not then\par
that you were a man foresighted. Yet twice blessed is help unlooked for, and\par
never was a meeting of friends more joyful.' And they clasped hand in hand.\par
'Nor indeed more timely,' said \'c9omer. 'You come none too soon, my friend. Much\par
loss and sorrow has befallen us.'\par
'Then let us avenge it, ere we speak of it!' said Aragorn, and they rode\par
back to battle together.\par
Hard fighting and long labour they had still; for the Southrons were bold\par
men and grim, and fierce in despair; and the Easterlings were strong and warhardened\par
and asked for no quarter. And so in this place and that, by burned\par
homestead or barn, upon hillock or mound, under wall or on field, still they\par
gathered and rallied and fought until the day wore away.\par
Then the Sun went at last behind Mindolluin and filled all the sky with a\par
great burning, so that the hills and the mountains were dyed as with blood;\par
fire glowed in the River, and the grass of the Pelennor lay red in the\par
nightfall. And in that hour the great Battle of the field of Gondor was over;\par
and not one living foe was left within the circuit of the Rammas. All were\par
slain save those who fled to die, or to drown in the red foam of the River.\par
Few ever came eastward to Morgul or Mordor; and to the land of the Haradrim\par
came only a tale from far off: a rumour of the wrath and terror of Gondor.\par
Aragorn and \'c9omer and Imrahil rode back towards the Gate of the City, and\par
they were now weary beyond joy or sorrow. These three were unscathed, for such\par
was their fortune and the skill and might of their arms, and few indeed had\par
dared to abide them or look on their faces in the hour of their wrath. But\par
many others were hurt or maimed or dead upon the field. The axes hewed Forlong\par
as he fought alone and unhorsed; and both Duilin of Morthond and his brother\par
were trampled to death when they assailed the _m\'fbmakil_, leading their bowmen\par
close to shoot at the eyes of the monsters. Neither Hirluin the fair would\par
return to Pinnath Gelin, nor Grimbold to Grimslade, nor Halbarad to the\par
Northlands, dour-handed Ranger. No few had fallen, renowned or nameless,\par
captain or soldier; for it was a great battle and the full count of it no tale\par
has told. So long afterward a maker in Rohan said in his song of the Mounds of\par
Mundburg:\par
We heard of the horns in the hills ringing,\par
the swords shining in the South-kingdom.\par
Steeds went striding to the Stoningland\par
as wind in the morning. War was kindled.\par
There Th\'e9oden fell, Thengling mighty,\par
to his golden halls and green pastures\par
in the Northern fields never returning,\par
high lord of the host. Harding and Guthl\'e1f\par
D\'fanhere and D\'e9orwine, doughty Grimbold,\par
Herefara and Herubrand, Horn and Fastred,\par
fought and fell there in a far country:\par
in the Mounds of Mundburg under mould they lie\par
with their league-fellows, lords of Gondor.\par
Neither Hirluin the Fair to the hills by the sea,\par
nor Forlong the old to the flowering vales\par
ever, to Arnach, to his own country\par
returned in triumph; nor the tall bowmen,\par
Derufin and Duilin, to their dark waters,\par
meres of Morthond under mountain-shadows.\par
Death in the morning and at day's ending\par
lords took and lowly. Long now they sleep\par
under grass in Gondor by the Great River.\par
Grey now as tears, gleaming silver,\par
red then it rolled, roaring water:\par
foam dyed with blood flamed at sunset;\par
as beacons mountains burned at evening;\par
red fell the dew in Rammas Echor.\par
_Chapter 7_\par
The Pyre of Denethor\par
When the dark shadow at the Gate withdrew Gandalf still sat motionless.\par
But Pippin rose to his feet, as if a great weight had been lifted from him;\par
and he stood listening to the horns, and it seemed to him that they would\par
break his heart with joy. And never in after years could he hear a horn blown\par
in the distance without tears starting in his eyes. But now suddenly his\par
errand returned to his memory, and he ran forward. At that moment Gandalf\par
stirred and spoke to Shadowfax, and was about to ride through the Gate.\par
'Gandalf, Gandalf! ' cried Pippin, and Shadowfax halted.\par
'What are you doing here?' said Gandalf. 'Is it not a law in the City\par
that those who wear the black and silver must stay in the Citadel, unless\par
their lord gives them leave?'\par
'He has,' said Pippin. 'He sent me away. But I am frightened. Something\par
terrible may happen up there. The Lord is out of his mind, I think. I am\par
afraid he will kill himself, and kill Faramir too. Can't you do something?'\par
Gandalf looked through the gaping Gate, and already on the fields he\par
heard the gathering sound of battle. He clenched his hand. 'I must go ' he\par
said. 'The Black Rider is abroad, and he will yet bring ruin on us. I have no\par
time.'\par
'But Faramir!' cried Pippin. 'He is not dead, and they will burn him\par
alive, if someone does not stop them.'\par
'Burn him alive?' said Gandalf. 'What is this tale? Be quick!'\par
'Denethor has gone to the Tombs,' said Pippin, 'and he has taken Faramir,\par
and he says we are all to burn, and he will not wait, and they are to make a\par
pyre and burn him on it, and Faramir as well. And he has sent men to fetch\par
wood and oil. And I have told Beregond, but I'm afraid he won't dare to leave\par
his post: he is on guard. And what can he do anyway?' So Pippin poured out his\par
tale, reaching up and touching Gandalf's knee with trembling hands. 'Can't you\par
save Faramir?'\par
'Maybe I can,' said Gandalf; 'but if I do, then others will die, I fear.\par
Well, I must come, since no other help can reach him. But evil and sorrow will\par
come of this. Even in the heart of our stronghold the Enemy has power to\par
strike us: for his will it is that is at work.'\par
Then having made up his mind he acted swiftly; and catching up Pippin and\par
setting him before him, he turned Shadowfax with a word. Up the climbing\par
streets of Minas Tirith they clattered, while the noise of war rose behind\par
them. Everywhere men were rising from their despair and dread, seizing their\par
weapons, crying one to another: 'Rohan has come!' Captains were shouting,\par
companies were mustering; many already were marching down to the Gate.\par
They met the Prince Imrahil, and he called to them: 'Whither now,\par
Mithrandir? The Rohirrim are fighting on the fields of Gondor! We must gather\par
all the strength that we can find.'\par
'You will need every man and more,' said Gandalf. 'Make all haste. I will\par
come when I can. But I have an errand to the Lord Denethor that will not wait.\par
Take command in the Lord's absence!'\par
They passed on; and as they climbed and drew near to the Citadel they\par
felt the wind blowing in their faces, and they caught the glimmer of morning\par
far away, a light growing in the southern sky. But it brought little hope to\par
them, not knowing what evil lay before them, fearing to come too late.\par
'Darkness is passing,' said Gandalf, 'but it still lies heavy on this\par
City.'\par
At the gate of the Citadel they found no guard. 'Then Beregond has\par
gone,' said Pippin more hopefully. They turned away and hastened along the\par
road to the Closed Door. It stood wide open, and the porter lay before it. He\par
was slain and his key had been taken.\par
'Work of the Enemy!' said Gandalf. 'Such deeds he loves: friend at war\par
with friend; loyalty divided in confusion of hearts.' Now he dismounted and\par
bade Shadowfax return to his stable. 'For, my friend,' he said, 'you and I\par
should have ridden to the fields long ago, but other matters delay me. Yet\par
come swiftly if I call!'\par
They passed the Door and walked on down the steep winding road. Light was\par
growing, and the tall columns and carven figures beside the way went slowly by\par
like grey ghosts.\par
Suddenly the silence was broken, and they heard below them cries and the\par
ringing of swords: such sounds as had not been heard in the hallowed places\par
since the building of the City. At last they came to Rath D\'ednen and hastened\par
towards the House of the Stewards, looming in the twilight under its great\par
dome.\par
'Stay! Stay!' cried Gandalf, springing forward to the stone stair before\par
the door. 'Stay this madness!'\par
For there were the servants of Denethor with swords and torches in their\par
hands; but alone in the porch upon the topmost step stood Beregond, clad in\par
the black and silver of the Guard; and he held the door against them. Two of\par
them had already fallen to his sword, staining the hallows with their blood;\par
and the others cursed him, calling him outlaw and traitor to his master.\par
Even as Gandalf and Pippin ran forward, they heard from within the house\par
of the dead the voice of Denethor crying: 'Haste, haste! Do as I have bidden!\par
Slay me this renegade! Or must I do so myself?' Thereupon the door which\par
Beregond held shut with his left hand was wrenched open, and there behind him\par
stood the Lord of the City, tall and fell; a light like flame was in his eyes,\par
and he held a drawn sword.\par
But Gandalf sprang up the steps, and the men fell back from him and\par
covered their eyes; for his coming was like the incoming of a white light into\par
a dark place, and he came with great anger. He lifted up his hand, and in the\par
very stroke, the sword of Denethor flew up and left his grasp and fell behind\par
him in the shadows of the house; and Denethor stepped backward before Gandalf\par
as one amazed.\par
'What is this, my lord?' said the wizard. 'The houses of the dead are no\par
places for the living. And why do men fight here in the Hallows when there is\par
war enough before the Gate? Or has our Enemy come even to Rath D\'ednen?'\par
'Since when has the Lord of Gondor been answerable to thee?' said\par
Denethor. 'Or may I not command my own servants?'\par
'You may,' said Gandalf. 'But others may contest your will, when it is\par
turned to madness and evil. Where is your son, Faramir?'\par
'He lies within,' said Denethor, 'burning, already burning. They have set\par
a fire in his flesh. But soon all shall be burned. The West has failed. It\par
shall all go up in a great fire, and all shall be ended. Ash! Ash and smoke\par
blown away on the wind!'\par
Then Gandalf seeing the madness that was on him feared that he had\par
already done some evil deed, and he thrust forward, with Beregond and Pippin\par
behind him, while Denethor gave back until he stood beside the table within.\par
But there they found Faramir, still dreaming in his fever, lying upon the\par
table. Wood was piled under it, and high all about it, and all was drenched\par
with oil, even the garments of Faramir and the coverlets; but as yet no fire\par
had been set to the fuel. Then Gandalf revealed the strength that lay hid in\par
him; even as the light of his power was hidden under his grey mantle. He\par
leaped up on to the faggots, and raising the sick man lightly he sprang down\par
again, and bore him towards the door. But as he did so Faramir moaned and\par
called on his father in his dream.\par
Denethor started as one waking from a trance, and the flame died in his\par
eyes, and he wept; and he said: 'Do not take my son from me! He calls for me.'\par
'He calls,' said Gandalf, 'but you cannot come to him yet. For he must\par
seek healing on the threshold of death, and maybe find it not. Whereas your\par
part is to go out to the battle of your City, where maybe death awaits you.\par
This you know in your heart.'\par
'He will not wake again,' said Denethor. 'Battle is vain. Why should we\par
wish to live longer? Why should we not go to death side by side?'\par
'Authority is not given to you, Steward of Gondor, to order the hour of\par
your death,' answered Gandalf. 'And only the heathen kings, under the\par
domination of the Dark Power, did thus, slaying themselves in pride and\par
despair, murdering their kin to ease their own death.' Then passing through\par
the door he took Faramir from the deadly house and laid him on the bier on\par
which he had been brought, and which had now been set in the porch. Denethor\par
followed him, and stood trembling, looking with longing on the face of his\par
son. And for a moment, while all were silent and still, watching the Lord in\par
his throes, he wavered.\par
'Come!' said Gandalf. 'We are needed. There is much that you can yet do.'\par
Then suddenly Denethor laughed. He stood up tall and proud again, and\par
stepping swiftly back to the table he lifted from it the pillow on which his\par
head had lain. Then coming to the doorway he drew aside the covering, and lo!\par
he had between his hands a _palant\'edr_. And as he held it up, it seemed to\par
those that looked on that the globe began to glow with an inner flame, so that\par
the lean face of the Lord was lit as with a red fire, and it seemed cut out of\par
hard stone, sharp with black shadows, noble, proud, and terrible. His eyes\par
glittered.\par
'Pride and despair!' he cried. 'Didst thou think that the eyes of the\par
White Tower were blind? Nay, I have seen more than thou knowest, Grey Fool.\par
For thy hope is but ignorance. Go then and labour in healing! Go forth and\par
fight! Vanity. For a little space you may triumph on the field, for a day. But\par
against the Power that now arises there is no victory. To this City only the\par
first finger of its hand has yet been stretched. All the East is moving. And\par
even now the wind of thy hope cheats thee and wafts up Anduin a fleet with\par
black sails. The West has failed. It is time for all to depart who would not\par
be slaves.'\par
'Such counsels will make the Enemy's victory certain indeed,' said\par
Gandalf.\par
'Hope on then!' laughed Denethor. 'Do I not know thee, Mithrandir? Thy\par
hope is to rule in my stead, to stand behind every throne, north, south, or\par
west. I have read thy mind and its policies. Do I not know that you commanded\par
this halfling here to keep silence? That you brought him hither to be a spy\par
within my very chamber? And yet in our speech together I have learned the\par
names and purpose of all thy companions. So! With the left hand thou wouldst\par
use me for a little while as a shield against Mordor, and with the right bring\par
up this Ranger of the North to supplant me.\par
'But I say to thee, Gandalf Mithrandir, I will not be thy tool! I am\par
Steward of the House of An\'e1rion. I will not step down to be the dotard\par
chamberlain of an upstart. Even were his claim proved to me, still he comes\par
but of the line of Isildur. I will not bow to such a one, last of a ragged\par
house long bereft of lordship and dignity.'\par
'What then would you have,' said Gandalf, 'if your will could have its\par
way?'\par
'I would have things as they were in all the days of my life,' answered\par
Denethor, 'and in the days of my longfathers before me: to be the Lord of this\par
City in peace, and leave my chair to a son after me, who would be his own\par
master and no wizard's pupil. But if doom denies this to me, then I will have\par
_naught_: neither life diminished, nor love halved, nor honour abated.'\par
'To me it would not seem that a Steward who faithfully surrenders his\par
charge is diminished in love or in honour,' said Gandalf. 'And at the least\par
you shall not rob your son of his choice while his death is still in doubt.'\par
At those words Denethor's eyes flamed again, and taking the Stone under\par
his arm he drew a knife and strode towards the bier. But Beregond sprang\par
forward and set himself before Faramir.\par
'So!' cried Denethor. 'Thou hadst already stolen half my son's love. Now\par
thou stealest the hearts of my knights also, so that they rob me wholly of my\par
son at the last. But in this at least thou shalt not defy my will: to rule my\par
own end.'\par
'Come hither!' he cried to his servants. 'Come, if you are not all\par
recreant!' Then two of them ran up the steps to him. Swiftly he snatched a\par
torch from the hand of one and sprang back into the house. Before Gandalf\par
could hinder him he thrust the brand amid the fuel, and at once it crackled\par
and roared into flame.\par
Then Denethor leaped upon the table, and standing there wreathed in fire\par
and smoke he took up the staff of his stewardship that lay at his feet and\par
broke it on his knee. Casting the pieces into the blaze he bowed and laid\par
himself on the table, clasping the _palant\'edr_ with both hands upon his breast.\par
And it was said that ever after, if any man looked in that Stone, unless he\par
had a great strength of will to turn it to other purpose, he saw only two aged\par
hands withering in flame.\par
Gandalf in grief and horror turned his face away and closed the door. For\par
a while he stood in thought, silent upon the threshold, while those outside\par
heard the greedy roaring of the fire within. And then Denethor gave a great\par
cry, and afterwards spoke no more, nor was ever again seen by mortal men.\par
'So passes Denethor, son of Ecthelion,' said Gandalf: Then he turned to\par
Beregond and the Lord's servants that stood there aghast. 'And so pass also\par
the days of Gondor that you have known; for good or evil they are ended. Ill\par
deeds have been done here; but let now all enmity that lies between you be put\par
away, for it was contrived by the Enemy and works his will. You have been\par
caught in a net of warring duties that you did not weave. But think, you\par
servants of the Lord, blind in your obedience, that but for the treason of\par
Beregond Faramir, Captain of the White Tower, would now also be burned.\par
'Bear away from this unhappy place your comrades who have fallen. And we\par
will bear Faramir, Steward of Gondor, to a place where he can sleep in peace,\par
or die if that be his doom.'\par
Then Gandalf and Beregond taking up the bier bore it away towards the\par
Houses of Healing, while behind them walked Pippin with downcast head. But the\par
servants of the Lord stood gazing as stricken men at the house of the dead;\par
and even as Gandalf came to the end of Rath D\'ednen there was a great noise.\par
Looking back they saw the dome of the house crack and smokes issue forth; and\par
then with a rush and rumble of stone it fell in a flurry of fire; but still\par
unabated the flames danced and flickered among the ruins. Then in terror the\par
servants fled and followed Gandalf.\par
At length they came back to the Steward's Door, and Beregond looked with\par
grief at the porter. 'This deed I shall ever rue,' he said; 'but a madness of\par
haste was on me, and he would not listen, but drew sword against me.' Then\par
taking the key that he had wrested from the slain man he closed the door and\par
locked it. 'This should now be given to the Lord Faramir,' he said.\par
'The Prince of Dol Amroth is in command in the absence of the Lord,' said\par
Gandalf; 'but since he is not here, I must take this on myself. I bid you keep\par
the key and guard it, until the City is set in order again.'\par
Now at last they passed into the high circles of the City, and in the\par
light of morning they went their way towards the Houses of Healing; and these\par
were fair houses set apart, for the care of those who were grievously sick,\par
but now they were prepared for the tending of men hurt in battle or dying.\par
They stood not far from the Citadel-gate, in the sixth circle, nigh to its\par
southward wall, and about them was a garden and a greensward with trees, the\par
only such place in the City. There dwelt the few women that had been permitted\par
to remain in Minas Tirith, since they were skilled in healing or in the\par
service of the healers.\par
But even as Gandalf and his companions came carrying the bier to the main\par
door of the Houses, they heard a great cry that went up from the field before\par
the Gate and rising shrill and piercing into the sky passed, and died away on\par
the wind. So terrible was the cry that for a moment all stood still, and yet\par
when it had passed, suddenly their hearts were lifted up in such a hope as\par
they had not known since the darkness came out of the East; and it seemed to\par
them that the light grew clear and the sun broke through the clouds.\par
But Gandalf's face was grave and sad, and bidding Beregond and Pippin to\par
take Faramir into the Houses of Healing, he went up on to the walls nearby;\par
and there like a figure carven in white he stood in the new sun and looked\par
out. And he beheld with the sight that was given to him all that had befallen;\par
and when \'c9omer rode out from the forefront of his battle and stood beside\par
those who lay upon the field, he sighed, and he cast his cloak about him\par
again, and went from the walls. And Beregond and Pippin found him standing in\par
thought before the door of the Houses when they came out.\par
They looked at him, and for a while he was silent. At last he spoke. 'My\par
friends,' he said, 'and all you people of this city and of the Western lands!\par
Things of great sorrow and renown have come to pass. Shall we weep or be glad?\par
Beyond hope the Captain of our foes has been destroyed, and you have heard the\par
echo of his last despair. But he has not gone without woe and bitter loss. And\par
that I might have averted but for the madness of Denethor. So long has the\par
reach of our Enemy become! Alas! but now I perceive how his will was able to\par
enter into the very heart of the City.\par
'Though the Stewards deemed that it was a secret kept only by themselves,\par
long ago I guessed that here in the White Tower, one at least of the Seven\par
Seeing Stones was preserved. In the days of his wisdom Denethor did not\par
presume to use it, nor to challenge Sauron, knowing the limits of his own\par
strength. But his wisdom failed; and I fear that as the peril of his realm\par
grew he looked in the Stone and was deceived: far too often, I guess, since\par
Boromir departed. He was too great to be subdued to the will of the Dark\par
Power, he saw nonetheless only those things which that Power permitted him to\par
see. The knowledge which he obtained was, doubtless, often of service to him;\par
yet the vision of the great might of Mordor that was shown to him fed the\par
despair of his heart until it overthrew his mind.'\par
'Now I understand what seemed so strange to me!' said Pippin shuddering\par
at his memories as he spoke. 'The Lord went away from the room where Faramir\par
lay; and it was only when he returned that I first thought he was changed, old\par
and broken.'\par
'It was in the very hour that Faramir was brought to the Tower that many\par
of us saw a strange light in the topmost chamber,' said Beregond. 'But we have\par
seen that light before, and it has long been rumoured in the City, that the\par
Lord would at times wrestle in thought with his Enemy.'\par
'Alas! then I have guessed rightly,' said Gandalf. 'Thus the will of\par
Sauron entered into Minas Tirith; and thus I have been delayed here. And here\par
I shall still be forced to remain, for I shall soon have other charges, not\par
Faramir only.\par
'Now I must go down to meet those who come. I have seen a sight upon the\par
field that is very grievous to my heart, and greater sorrow may yet come to\par
pass. Come with me, Pippin! But you, Beregond, should return to the Citadel\par
and tell the chief of the Guard there what has befallen. It will be his duty,\par
I fear, to withdraw you from the Guard; but say to him that, if I may give him\par
counsel, you should be sent to the Houses of Healing, to be the guard and\par
servant of your captain, and to be at his side when he awakes \endash  if that shall\par
ever be again. For by you he was saved from the fire. Go now! I shall return\par
soon.'\par
With that he turned away and went with Pippin down towards the lower\par
city. And even as they hastened on their way the wind brought a grey rain, and\par
all the fires sank, and there arose a great smoke before them.\par
_Chapter 8_\par
The Houses of Healing\par
A mist was in Merry's eyes of tears and weariness when they drew near the\par
ruined Gate of Minas Tirith. He gave little heed to the wreck and slaughter\par
that lay about all. Fire and smoke and stench was in the air; for many engines\par
had been burned or cast into the fire-pits, and many of the slain also, while\par
here and there lay many carcases of the great Southron monsters, half-burned,\par
or broken by stone-cast, or shot through the eyes by the valiant archers of\par
Morthond. The flying rain had ceased for a time, and the sun gleamed up above;\par
but all the lower city was still wrapped in a smouldering reek.\par
Already men were labouring to clear a way through the jetsam of battle;\par
and now out from the Gate came some bearing litters. Gently they laid \'c9owyn\par
upon soft pillows; but the king's body they covered with a great cloth of\par
gold, and they bore torches about him, and their flames, pale in the sunlight,\par
were fluttered by the wind.\par
So Th\'e9oden and \'c9owyn came to the City of Gondor, and all who saw them\par
bared their heads and bowed; and they passed through the ash and fume of the\par
burned circle, and went on and up along the streets of stone. To Merry the\par
ascent seemed agelong, a meaningless journey in a hateful dream, going on and\par
on to some dim ending that memory cannot seize.\par
Slowly the lights of the torches in front of him flickered and went out,\par
and he was walking in a darkness; and he thought: 'This is a tunnel leading to\par
a tomb; there we shall stay forever.' But suddenly into his dream there fell a\par
living voice.\par
'Well, Merry! Thank goodness I have found you!'\par
He looked up and the mist before his eyes cleared a little. There was\par
Pippin! They were face to face in a narrow lane, and but for themselves it was\par
empty. He rubbed his eyes.\par
'Where is the king?' he said. 'And \'c9owyn?' Then he stumbled and sat down\par
on a doorstep and began to weep again.\par
'They have gone up into the Citadel,' said Pippin. 'I think you must have\par
fallen asleep on your feet and taken the wrong turning. When we found that you\par
were not with them, Gandalf sent me to look for you. Poor old Merry! How glad\par
I am to see you again! But you are worn out, and I won't bother you with any\par
talk. But tell me, are you hurt, or wounded?'\par
'No,' said Merry. 'Well, no, I don't think so. But I can't use my right\par
arm, Pippin, not since I stabbed him. And my sword burned all away like a\par
piece of wood.'\par
Pippin's face was anxious. 'Well, you had better come with me as quick as\par
you can,' he said. 'I wish I could carry you. You aren't fit to walk any\par
further. They shouldn't have let you walk at all; but you must forgive them.\par
So many dreadful things have happened in the City, Merry, that one poor hobbit\par
coming in from the battle is easily overlooked.'\par
'It's not always a misfortune being overlooked,' said Merry. 'I was\par
overlooked just now by \endash  no, no, I can't speak of it. Help me, Pippin! It's\par
all going dark again, and my arm is so cold.'\par
'Lean on me, Merry lad!' said Pippin. 'Come now! Foot by foot. It's not\par
far.'\par
'Are you going to bury me?' said Merry.\par
'No, indeed!' said Pippin, trying to sound cheerful, though his heart was\par
wrung with fear and pity. 'No, we are going to the Houses of Healing.'\par
They turned out of the lane that ran between tall houses and the outer\par
wall of the fourth circle, and they regained the main street climbing up to\par
the Citadel. Step by step they went, while Merry swayed and murmured as one in\par
sleep.\par
'I'll never get him there,' thought Pippin. 'Is there no one to help me?\par
I can't leave him here.' Just then to his surprise a boy came running up\par
behind, and as he passed he recognized Bergil Beregond's son.\par
'Hullo, Bergil!' he called. 'Where are you going? Glad to see you again,\par
and still alive!'\par
'I am running errands for the Healers,' said Bergil. 'I cannot stay.'\par
'Don't!' said Pippin. 'But tell them up there that I have a sick hobbit,\par
a _perian_ mind you, come from the battle-field. I don't think he can walk so\par
far. If Mithrandir is there, he will be glad of the message.' Bergil ran on.\par
'I'd better wait here,' thought Pippin. So he let Merry sink gently down\par
on to the pavement in a patch of sunlight, and then he sat down beside him,\par
laying Merry's head in his lap. He felt his body and limbs gently, and took\par
his friend's hands in his own. The right hand felt icy to the touch.\par
It was not long before Gandalf himself came in search of them. He stooped\par
over Merry and caressed his brow; then he lifted him carefully. 'He should\par
have been borne in honour into this city,' he said. 'He has well repaid my\par
trust; for if Elrond had not yielded to me, neither of you would have set out;\par
and then far more grievous would the evils of this day have been.' He sighed.\par
'And yet here is another charge on my hands, while all the time the battle\par
hangs in the balance.'\par
So at last Faramir and \'c9owyn and Meriadoc were laid in beds in the Houses\par
of Healing; and there they were tended well. For though all lore was in these\par
latter days fallen from its fullness of old, the leechcraft of Gondor was\par
still wise, and skilled in the healing of wound and hurt, and all such\par
sickness as east of the Sea mortal men were subject to. Save old age only. For\par
that they had found no cure; and indeed the span of their lives had now waned\par
to little more than that of other men, and those among them who passed the\par
tale of five score years with vigour were grown few, save in some houses of\par
purer blood. But now their art and knowledge were baffled; for there were many\par
sick of a malady that would not be healed; and they called it the Black\par
Shadow, for it came from the Nazg\'fbl. And those who were stricken with it fell\par
slowly into an ever deeper dream, and then passed to silence and a deadly\par
cold, and so died. And it seemed to the tenders of the sick that on the\par
Halfling and on the Lady of Rohan this malady lay heavily. Still at whiles as\par
the morning wore away they would speak, murmuring in their dreams; and the\par
watchers listened to all that they said, hoping perhaps to learn something\par
that would help them to understand their hurts. But soon they began to fall\par
down into the darkness, and as the sun turned west a grey shadow crept over\par
their faces. But Faramir burned with a fever that would not abate.\par
Gandalf went from one to the other full of care, and he was told all that\par
the watchers could hear. And so the day passed, while the great battle outside\par
went on with shifting hopes and strange tidings; and still Gandalf waited and\par
watched and did not go forth; till at last the red sunset filled all the sky,\par
and the light through the windows fell on the grey faces of the sick. Then it\par
seemed to those who stood by that in the glow the faces flushed softly as with\par
health returning, but it was only a mockery of hope.\par
Then an old wife, Ioreth, the eldest of the women who served in that\par
house, looking on the fair face of Faramir, wept, for all the people loved\par
him. And she said: 'Alas! if he should die. Would that there were kings in\par
Gondor, as there were once upon a time, they say! For it is said in old lore:\par
_The hands of the king are the hands of a healer_. And so the rightful king\par
could ever be known.'\par
And Gandalf, who stood by, said: 'Men may long remember your words,\par
Ioreth! For there is hope in them. Maybe a king has indeed returned to Gondor;\par
or have you not heard the strange tidings that have come to the City?'\par
'I have been too busy with this and that to heed all the crying and\par
shouting,' she answered. 'All I hope is that those murdering devils do not\par
come to this House and trouble the sick.'\par
Then Gandalf went out in haste, and already the fire in the sky was\par
burning out, and the smouldering hills were fading, while ash-grey evening\par
crept over the fields.\par
Now as the sun went down Aragorn and \'c9omer and Imrahil drew near the City\par
with their captains and knights; and when they came before the Gate Aragorn\par
said:\par
'Behold the Sun setting in a great fire! It is a sign of the end and fall\par
of many things, and a change in the tides of the world. But this City and\par
realm has rested in the charge of the Stewards for many long years, and I fear\par
that if I enter it unbidden, then doubt and debate may arise, which should not\par
be while this war is fought. I will not enter in, nor make any claim, until it\par
be seen whether we or Mordor shall prevail. Men shall pitch my tents upon the\par
field, and here I will await the welcome of the Lord of the City.'\par
But \'c9omer said: 'Already you have raised the banner of the Kings and\par
displayed the tokens of Elendil's House. Will you suffer these to be\par
challenged?'\par
'No,' said Aragorn. 'But I deem the time unripe; and I have no mind for\par
strife except with our Enemy and his servants.'\par
And the Prince Imrahil said. Your words, lord, are wise, if one who is a\par
kinsman of the Lord Denethor may counsel you in this matter. He is strongwilled\par
and proud, but old; and his mood has been strange since his son was\par
stricken down. Yet I would not have you remain like a beggar at the door.'\par
'Not a beggar,' said Aragorn. 'Say a captain of the Rangers, who are\par
unused to cities and houses of stone.' And he commanded that his banner should\par
be furled; and he did off the Star of the North Kingdom and gave it to the\par
keeping of the sons of Elrond.\par
Then the Prince Imrahil and \'c9omer of Rohan left him and passed through\par
the City and the tumult of the people, and mounted to the Citadel; and they\par
came to the Hall of the Tower, seeking the Steward. But they found his chair\par
empty, and before the dais lay Th\'e9oden King of the Mark upon a bed of state;\par
and twelve torches stood about it, and twelve guards, knights both of Rohan\par
and Gondor. And the hangings of the bed were of green and white, but upon the\par
king was laid the great cloth of gold up to his breast, and upon that his\par
unsheathed sword, and at his feet his shield, The light of the torches\par
shimmered in his white hair like sun in the spray of a fountain, but his face\par
was fair and young, save that a peace lay on it beyond the reach of youth; and\par
it seemed that he slept.\par
When they had stood silent for a time beside the king, Imrahil said:\par
'Where is the Steward? And where also is Mithrandir?'\par
And one of the guards answered: 'The Steward of Gondor is in the Houses\par
of Healing.'\par
But \'c9omer said: 'Where is the Lady \'c9owyn, my sister; for surely she\par
should be lying beside the king, and in no less honour? Where have they\par
bestowed her?'\par
And Imrahil said: 'But the Lady \'c9owyn was yet living when they bore her\par
hither. Did you not know?'\par
Then hope unlooked-for came so suddenly to \'c9omer's heart, and with it the\par
bite of care and fear renewed, that he said no more, but turned and went\par
swiftly from the hall; and the Prince followed him. And when they came forth\par
evening had fallen and many stars were in the sky. And there came Gandalf on\par
foot and with him one cloaked in grey; and they met before the doors of the\par
Houses of Healing. And they greeted Gandalf and said: 'We seek the Steward,\par
and men say that he is in this House. Has any hurt befallen him? And the Lady\par
\'c9owyn, where is she?'\par
And Gandalf answered: 'She lies within and is not dead, but is near\par
death. But the Lord Faramir was wounded by an evil dart, as you have heard,\par
and he is now the Steward; for Denethor has departed, and his house is in\par
ashes.' And they were filled with grief and wonder at the tale that he told.\par
But Imrahil said: 'So victory is shorn of gladness, and it is bitter\par
bought, if both Gondor and Rohan are in one day bereft of their lords. \'c9omer\par
rules the Rohirrim. Who shall rule the City meanwhile? Shall we not send now\par
for the Lord Aragorn?'\par
And the cloaked man spoke and said: 'He is come.' And they saw as he\par
stepped into the light of the lantern by the door that it was Aragorn, wrapped\par
in the grey cloak of L\'f3rien above his mail, and bearing no other token than\par
the green stone of Galadriel. 'I have come because Gandalf begs me to do so,'\par
he said. 'But for the present I am but the Captain of the D\'fanedain of Arnor;\par
and the Lord of Dol Amroth shall rule the City until Faramir awakes. But it is\par
my counsel that Gandalf should rule us all in the days that follow and in our\par
dealings with the Enemy.' And they agreed upon that.\par
Then Gandalf said: 'Let us not stay at the door, for the time is urgent.\par
Let us enter! For it is only in the coming of Aragorn that any hope remains\par
for the sick that lie in the House. Thus spake Ioreth, wise-woman of Gondor:\par
_The hands of the king are the hands of a healer, and so shall the rightful\par
king be known_.'\par
Then Aragorn entered first and the others followed. And there at the door\par
were two guards in the livery of the Citadel: one tall, but the other scarce\par
the height of a boy; and when he saw them he cried aloud in surprise and joy.\par
'Strider! How splendid! Do you know, I guessed it was you in the black\par
ships. But they were all shouting _corsairs_ and wouldn't listen to me. How\par
did you do it?'\par
Aragorn laughed, and took the hobbit by the hand. 'Well met indeed!' he\par
said. 'But there is not time yet for travellers' tales.'\par
But Imrahil said to \'c9omer: 'Is it thus that we speak to our kings? Yet\par
maybe he will wear his crown in some other name!'\par
And Aragorn hearing him, turned and said: 'Verily, for in the high tongue\par
of old I am _Elessar_, the _Elfstone_, and _Envinyatar_, the Renewer': and he\par
lifted from his breast the green stone that lay there. 'But Strider shall be\par
the name of my house, if that be ever established. In the high tongue it will\par
not sound so ill, and _Telcontar_ I will be and all the heirs of my body.'\par
And with that they passed into the House; and as they went towards the\par
rooms where the sick were tended Gandalf told of the deeds of \'c9owyn and\par
Meriadoc. 'For,' he said, 'long have I stood by them and at first they spoke\par
much in their dreaming, before they sank into the deadly darkness. Also it is\par
given to me to see many things far off.'\par
Aragorn went first to Faramir, and then to the Lady \'c9owyn, and last to\par
Merry. When he had looked on the faces of the sick and seen their hurts he\par
sighed. 'Here I must put forth all such power and skill as is given to me,' he\par
said. 'Would that Elrond were here, for he is the eldest of all our race, and\par
has the greater power.'\par
And \'c9omer seeing that he was sorrowful and weary said: 'First you must\par
rest, surely, and at the least eat a little?'\par
But Aragorn answered: 'Nay, for these three, and most soon for Faramir,\par
time is running out. All speed is needed.'\par
Then he called to Ioreth and he said: 'You have store in this House of\par
the herbs of healing?'\par
'Yes, lord,' she answered; 'but not enough, I reckon, for all that will\par
need them. But I am sure I do not know where we shall find more; for all\par
things are amiss in these dreadful days, what with fires and burnings, and the\par
lads that run errands so few, and all the roads blocked. Why, it is days out\par
of count since ever a carrier came in from Lossarnach to the market! But we do\par
our best in this House with what we have, as I am sure your lordship will\par
know.'\par
'I will judge that when I see,' said Aragorn. 'One thing also is short\par
time for speech. Have you _athelas_?'\par
'I do not know, I am sure, lord,' she answered, 'at least not by that\par
name. I will go and ask of the herb-master; he knows all the old names.'\par
'It is also called _kingsfoil_,' said Aragorn; 'and maybe you know it by\par
that name, for so the country-folk call it in these latter days.' 'Oh that!'\par
said Ioreth. 'Well, if your lordship had named it at first I could have told\par
you. No, we have none of it, I am sure. Why, I have never heard that it had\par
any great virtue; and indeed I have often said to my sisters when we came upon\par
it growing in the woods: "kingsfoil" I said, " 'tis a strange name, and I\par
wonder why 'tis called so; for if I were a king, I would have plants more\par
bright in my garden". Still it smells sweet when bruised, does it not? If\par
sweet is the right word: wholesome, maybe, is nearer.'\par
'Wholesome verily,' said Aragorn. 'And now, dame, if you love the Lord\par
Faramir, run as quick as your tongue and get me kingsfoil, if there is a leaf\par
in the City.'\par
'And if not,' said Gandalf, 'I will ride to Lossarnach with Ioreth behind\par
me, and she shall take me to the woods, but not to her sisters. And Shadowfax\par
shall show her the meaning of haste.'\par
When Ioreth was gone, Aragorn bade the other women to make water hot.\par
Then he took Faramir's hand in his, and laid the other hand upon the sick\par
man's brow. It was drenched with sweat; but Faramir did not move or make any\par
sign, and seemed hardly to breathe.\par
'He is nearly spent,' said Aragorn turning to Gandalf. 'But this comes\par
not from the wound. See! that is healing. Had he been smitten by some dart of\par
the Nazg\'fbl, as you thought, he would have died that night. This hurt was given\par
by some Southron arrow, I would guess. Who drew it forth? Was it kept?'\par
'I drew it forth,' said Imrahil, 'and staunched the wound. But I did not\par
keep the arrow, for we had much to do. It was, as I remember, just such a dart\par
as the Southrons use. Yet I believed that it came from the Shadows above, for\par
else his fever and sickness were not to be understood; since the wound was not\par
deep or vital. How then do you read the matter?'\par
'Weariness, grief for his father's mood, a wound, and over all the Black\par
Breath,' said Aragorn. 'He is a man of staunch will, for already he had come\par
close under the Shadow before ever he rode to battle on the out-walls. Slowly\par
the dark must have crept on him, even as he fought and strove to hold his\par
outpost. Would that I could have been here sooner!'\par
Thereupon the herb-master entered. 'Your lordship asked for kingsfoil, as\par
the rustics name it, he said; or _athelas_ in the noble tongue, or to those\par
who know somewhat of the Valinorean. . .'\par
'I do so,' said Aragorn, 'and I care not whether you say now _as\'eba\par
aranion_ or _kingsfoil_, so long as you have some.'\par
'Your pardon lord!' said the man. 'I see you are a lore-master, not\par
merely a captain of war. But alas! sir, we do not keep this thing in the\par
Houses of Healing, where only the gravely hurt or sick are tended. For it has\par
no virtue that we know of, save perhaps to sweeten a fouled air, or to drive\par
away some passing heaviness. Unless, of course, you give heed to rhymes of old\par
days which women such as our good Ioreth still repeat without understanding.\par
When the black breath blows\par
and death's shadow grows\par
and all lights pass,\par
come athelas! come athelas!\par
Life to the dying\par
In the king's hand lying!\par
It is but a doggrel, I fear, garbled in the memory of old wives. Its\par
meaning I leave to your judgement, if indeed it has any. But old folk still\par
use an infusion of the herb for headaches.'\par
'Then in the name of the king, go and find some old man of less lore and\par
more wisdom who keeps some in his house!' cried Gandalf.\par
Now Aragorn knelt beside Faramir, and held a hand upon his brow. And\par
those that watched felt that some great struggle was going on. For Aragorn's\par
face grew grey with weariness; and ever and anon he called the name of\par
Faramir, but each time more faintly to their hearing, as if Aragorn himself\par
was removed from them, and walked afar in some dark vale, calling for one that\par
was lost.\par
And at last Bergil came running in, and he bore six leaves in a cloth.\par
'It is kingsfoil, Sir,' he said; 'but not fresh, I fear. It must have been\par
culled two weeks ago at the least. I hope it will serve, Sir?' Then looking at\par
Faramir he burst into tears.\par
But Aragorn smiled. 'It will serve,' he said. 'The worst is now over.\par
Stay and be comforted!' Then taking two leaves, he laid them on his hands and\par
breathed on them, and then he crushed them, and straightway a living freshness\par
filled the room, as if the air itself awoke and tingled, sparkling with joy.\par
And then he cast the leaves into the bowls of steaming water that were brought\par
to him, and at once all hearts were lightened. For the fragrance that came to\par
each was like a memory of dewy mornings of unshadowed sun in some land of\par
which the fair world in Spring is itself but a fleeting memory. But Aragorn\par
stood up as one refreshed, and his eyes smiled as he held a bowl before\par
Faramir's dreaming face.\par
'Well now! Who would have believed it?' said Ioreth to a woman that stood\par
beside her. 'The weed is better than I thought. It reminds me of the roses of\par
Imloth Melui when I was a lass, and no king could ask for better.'\par
Suddenly Faramir stirred, and he opened his eyes, and he looked on\par
Aragorn who bent over him; and a light of knowledge and love was kindled in\par
his eyes, and he spoke softly. 'My lord, you called me. I come. What does the\par
king command?'\par
'Walk no more in the shadows, but awake!' said Aragorn. 'You are weary.\par
Rest a while, and take food, and be ready when I return.'\par
'I will, lord,' said Faramir. 'For who would lie idle when the king has\par
returned?'\par
'Farewell then for a while!' said Aragorn. 'I must go to others who need\par
me.' And he left the chamber with Gandalf and Imrahil; but Beregond and his\par
son remained behind, unable to contain their joy. As he followed Gandalf and\par
shut the door Pippin heard Ioreth exclaim:\par
'King! Did you hear that? What did I say? The hands of a healer, I\par
said.' And soon the word had gone out from the House that the king was indeed\par
come among them, and after war he brought healing; and the news ran through\par
the City.\par
But Aragorn came to \'c9owyn, and he said: 'Here there is a grievous hurt\par
and a heavy blow. The arm that was broken has been tended with due skill, and\par
it will mend in time, if she has the strength to live: It is the shield-arm\par
that is maimed; but the chief evil comes through the sword-arm. In that there\par
now seems no life, although it is unbroken.\par
'Alas! For she was pitted against a foe beyond the strength of her mind\par
or body. And those who will take a weapon to such an enemy must be sterner\par
than steel, if the very shock shall not destroy them. It was an evil doom that\par
set her in his path. For she is a fair maiden, fairest lady of a house of\par
queens. And yet I know not how I should speak of her. When I first looked on\par
her and perceived her unhappiness, it seemed to me that I saw a white flower\par
standing straight and proud, shapely as a lily, and yet knew that it was hard,\par
as if wrought by elf-wrights out of steel. Or was it, maybe, a frost that had\par
turned its sap to ice, and so it stood, bitter-sweet, still fair to see, but\par
stricken, soon to fall and die? Her malady begins far back before this day,\par
does it not, \'c9omer?'\par
'I marvel that you should ask me, lord,' he answered. 'For I hold you\par
blameless in this matter, as in all else; yet I knew not that \'c9owyn, my\par
sister, was touched by any frost, until she first looked on you. Care and\par
dread she had, and shared with me, in the days of Wormtongue and the king's\par
bewitchment; and she tended the king in growing fear. But that did not bring\par
her to this pass!'\par
'My friend,' said Gandalf, 'you had horses, and deeds of arms, and the\par
free fields; but she, born in the body of a maid, had a spirit and courage at\par
least the match of yours. Yet she was doomed to wait upon an old man, whom she\par
loved as a father, and watch him falling into a mean dishonoured dotage; and\par
her part seemed to her more ignoble than that of the staff he leaned on.\par
'Think you that Wormtongue had poison only for Th\'e9oden's ears? _Dotard!\par
What is the house of Eorl but a thatched barn where brigands drink in the\par
reek, and their brats roll on the floor among their dogs?_Have you not heard\par
those words before? Saruman spoke them, the teacher of Wormtongue. Though I do\par
not doubt that Wormtongue at home wrapped their meaning in terms more cunning.\par
My lord, if your sister's love for you, and her will still bent to her duty,\par
had not restrained her lips; you might have heard even such things as these\par
escape them. But who knows what she spoke to the darkness, alone, in the\par
bitter watches of the night, when all her life seemed shrinking, and the walls\par
of her bower closing in about her, a hutch to trammel some wild thing in?'\par
Then \'c9omer was silent, and looked on his sister, as if pondering anew all\par
the days of their past life together. But Aragorn said: 'I saw also what you\par
saw, \'c9omer. Few other griefs amid the ill chances of this world have more\par
bitterness and shame for a man's heart than to behold the love of a lady so\par
fair and brave that cannot be returned Sorrow and pity have followed me ever\par
since I left her desperate in Dunharrow and rode to the Paths of the Dead; and\par
no fear upon that way was so present as the fear for what might befall her.\par
And yet, \'c9omer, I say to you that she loves you more truly than me; for you\par
she loves and knows; but in me she loves only a shadow and a thought: a hope\par
of glory and great deeds, and lands far from the fields of Rohan.\par
'I have, maybe, the power to heal her body, and to recall her from the\par
dark valley. But to what she will awake: hope, or forgetfulness, or despair, I\par
do not know. And if to despair, then she will die, unless other healing comes\par
which I cannot bring. Alas! for her deeds have set her among the queens of\par
great renown.'\par
Then Aragorn stooped and looked in her face, and it was indeed white as a\par
lily, cold as frost, and hard as graven stone. But he bent and kissed her on\par
the brow, and called her softly, saying:\par
'\'c9owyn \'c9omund's daughter, awake! For your enemy has passed away!'\par
She did not stir, but now she began again to breathe deeply, so that her\par
breast rose and fell beneath the white linen of the sheet. Once more Aragorn\par
bruised two leaves of _athelas_ and cast them into steaming water; and he\par
laved her brow with it, and her right arm lying cold and nerveless on the\par
coverlet.\par
Then, whether Aragorn had indeed some forgotten power of Westernesse, or\par
whether it was but his words of the Lady \'c9owyn that wrought on them, as the\par
sweet influence of the herb stole about the chamber it seemed to those who\par
stood by that a keen wind blew through the window, and it bore no scent, but\par
was an air wholly fresh and clean and young, as if it had not before been\par
breathed by any living thing and came new-made from snowy mountains high\par
beneath a dome of stars, or from shores of silver far away washed by seas of\par
foam.\par
'Awake, \'c9owyn, Lady of Rohan!' said Aragorn again, and he took her right\par
hand in his and felt it warm with life returning. 'Awake! The shadow is gone\par
and all darkness is washed clean!' Then he laid her hand in \'c9omer's and\par
stepped away. 'Call her!' he said, and he passed silently from the chamber.\par
'\'c9owyn, \'c9owyn!' cried \'c9omer amid his tears. But she opened her eyes and\par
said: '\'c9omer! What joy is this? For they said that you were slain. Nay, but\par
that was only the dark voices in my dream. How long have I been dreaming?'\par
'Not long, my sister,' said \'c9omer. 'But think no more on it!'\par
' I am strangely weary,' she said. 'I must rest a little. But tell me,\par
what of the Lord of the Mark? Alas! Do not tell me that that was a dream for I\par
know that it was not. He is dead as he foresaw.'\par
'He is dead,' said \'c9omer, 'but he bade me say farewell to \'c9owyn dearer\par
than daughter. He lies now in great honour in the Citadel of Gondor.'\par
'That is grievous,' she said. 'And yet it is good beyond all that I dared\par
hope in the dark days, when it seemed that the House of Eorl was sunk in\par
honour less than any shepherd's cot. And what of the king's esquire, the\par
Halfling? \'c9omer, you shall make him a knight of the Riddermark, for he is\par
valiant!'\par
'He lies nearby in this House, and I will go to him,' said Gandalf.\par
'\'c9omer shall stay here for a while. But do not speak yet of war or woe, until\par
you are made whole again. Great gladness it is to see you wake again to health\par
and hope, so valiant a lady!'\par
'To health?' said \'c9owyn. 'It may be so. At least while there is an empty\par
saddle of some fallen Rider that I can fill, and there are deeds to do. But to\par
hope? I do not know.'\par
Gandalf and Pippin came to Merry's room, and there they found Aragorn\par
standing by the bed. 'Poor old Merry!' cried Pippin, and he ran to the\par
bedside, for it seemed to him that his friend looked worse, and a greyness was\par
in his face, as if a weight of years of sorrow lay on him; and suddenly a fear\par
seized Pippin that Merry would die.\par
'Do not be afraid,' said Aragorn. 'I came in time, and I have called him\par
back. He is weary now, and grieved, and he has taken a hurt like the Lady\par
\'c9owyn, daring to smite that deadly thing. But these evils can be amended, so\par
strong and gay a spirit is in him. His grief he will not forget; but it will\par
not darken his heart, it will teach him wisdom.'\par
Then Aragorn laid his hand on Merry's head, and passing his hand gently\par
through the brown curls, he touched the eyelids, and called him by name. And\par
when the fragrance of _athelas_ stole through the room, like the scent of\par
orchards, and of heather in the sunshine full of bees, suddenly Merry awoke,\par
and he said:\par
'I am hungry. What is the time?'\par
'Past supper-time now,' said Pippin; 'though I daresay I could bring you\par
something, if they will let me.'\par
'They will indeed,' said Gandalf. 'And anything else that this Rider of\par
Rohan may desire, if it can be found in Minas Tirith, where his name is in\par
honour.'\par
'Good!' said Merry. 'Then I would like supper first, and after that a\par
pipe.' At that his face clouded. 'No, not a pipe. I don't think I'll smoke\par
again.'\par
'Why not?' said Pippin.\par
'Well,' answered Merry slowly. 'He is dead. It has brought it all back to\par
me. He said he was sorry he had never had a chance of talking herb-lore with\par
me. Almost the last thing he ever said. I shan't ever be able to smoke again\par
without thinking of him, and that day, Pippin, when he rode up to Isengard and\par
was so polite.'\par
'Smoke then, and think of him!' said Aragorn. 'For he was a gentle heart\par
and a great king and kept his oaths; and he rose out of the shadows to a last\par
fair morning. Though your service to him was brief, it should be a memory glad\par
and honourable to the end of your days.'\par
Merry smiled. 'Well then,' he said, 'if Strider will provide what is\par
needed, I will smoke and think. I had some of Saruman's best in my pack, but\par
what became of it in the battle, I am sure I don't know.'\par
'Master Meriadoc,' said Aragorn, 'if you think that I have passed through\par
the mountains and the realm of Gondor with fire and sword to bring herbs to a\par
careless soldier who throws away his gear, you are mistaken. If your pack has\par
not been found, then you must send for the herb-master of this House. And he\par
will tell you that he did not know that the herb you desire had any virtues,\par
but that it is called _westmansweed_ by the vulgar, and _galenas_ by the\par
noble, and other names in other tongues more learned, and after adding a few\par
half-forgotten rhymes that he does not understand, he will regretfully inform\par
you that there is none in the House, and he will leave you to reflect on the\par
history of tongues. And so now must I. For I have not slept in such a bed as\par
this, since I rode from Dunharrow, nor eaten since the dark before dawn.'\par
Merry seized his hand and kissed it. 'I am frightfully sorry,' he said.\par
'Go at once! Ever since that night at Bree we have been a nuisance to you. But\par
it is the way of my people to use light words at such times and say less than\par
they mean. We fear to say too much. It robs us of the right words when a jest\par
is out of place.'\par
'I know that well, or I would not deal with you in the same way ' said\par
Aragorn. 'May the Shire live for ever unwithered!' And kissing Merry he went\par
out, and Gandalf went with him.\par
Pippin remained behind. 'Was there ever any one like him?' he said.\par
'Except Gandalf, of course. I think they must be related. My dear ass, your\par
pack is lying by your bed, and you had it on your back when I met you. He saw\par
it all the time, of course. And anyway I have some stuff of my own. Come on\par
now! Longbottom Leaf it is. Fill up while I run and see about some food. And\par
then let's be easy for a bit. Dear me! We Tooks and Brandybucks, we can't live\par
long on the heights.'\par
'No,' said Merry. 'I can't. Not yet, at any rate. But at least, Pippin,\par
we can now see them, and honour them. It is best to love first what you are\par
fitted to love, I suppose: you must start somewhere and have some roots, and\par
the soil of the Shire is deep. Still there are things deeper and higher; and\par
not a gaffer could tend his garden in what he calls peace but for them,\par
whether he knows about them or not. I am glad that I know about them, a\par
little. But I don't know why I am talking like this. Where is that leaf? And\par
get my pipe out of my pack, if it isn't broken.'\par
Aragorn and Gandalf went now to the Warden of the Houses of Healing, and\par
they counselled him that Faramir and \'c9owyn should remain there and still be\par
tended with care for many days.\par
'The Lady \'c9owyn,' said Aragorn, 'will wish soon to rise and depart; but\par
she should not be permitted to do so, if you can in any way restrain her,\par
until at least ten days be passed.'\par
'As for Faramir,' said Gandalf, 'he must soon learn that his father is\par
dead. But the full tale of the madness of Denethor should not be told to him,\par
until he is quite healed and has duties to do. See that Beregond and the\par
_perian_ who were present do not speak to him of these things yet!'\par
And the other _perian_ Meriadoc who is under my care, what of him?' said\par
the Warden.\par
'It is likely that he will be fit to arise tomorrow, for a short while,'\par
said Aragorn. 'Let him do so, if he wishes. He may walk a little in the care\par
of his friends.'\par
'They are a remarkable race,' said the Warden, nodding his head. 'Very\par
tough in the fibre, I deem.'\par
At the doors of the Houses many were already gathered to see Aragorn, and\par
they followed after him; and when at last he had supped, men came and prayed\par
that he would heal their kinsmen or their friends whose lives were in peril\par
through hurt or wound, or who lay under the Black Shadow. And Aragorn arose\par
and went out, and he sent for the sons of Elrond, and together they laboured\par
far into the night. And word went through the City: 'The King is come again\par
indeed.' And they named him Elfstone, because of the green stone that he wore,\par
and so the name which it was foretold at his birth that he should bear was\par
chosen for him by his own people.\par
And when he could labour no more, he cast his cloak about him, and\par
slipped out of the City, and went to his tent just ere dawn and slept for a\par
little. And in the morning the banner of Dol Amroth, a white ship like a swan\par
upon blue water, floated from the Tower, and men looked up and wondered if the\par
coming of the King had been but a dream.\par
_Chapter 9_\par
The Last Debate\par
The morning came after the day of battle, and it was fair with light\par
clouds and the wind turning westward. Legolas and Gimli were early abroad, and\par
they begged leave to go up into the City; for they were eager to see Merry and\par
Pippin.\par
'It is good to learn that they are still alive,' said Gimli; 'for they\par
cost us great pains in our march over Rohan, and I would not have such pains\par
all wasted.'\par
Together the Elf and the Dwarf entered Minas Tirith, and folk that saw\par
them pass marvelled to see such companions; for Legolas was fair of face\par
beyond the measure of Men, and he sang an elven-song in a clear voice as he\par
walked in the morning; but Gimli stalked beside him, stroking his beard and\par
staring about him.\par
'There is some good stone-work here,' he said as he looked at the walls;\par
'but also some that is less good, and the streets could be better contrived.\par
When Aragorn comes into his own, I shall offer him the service of stonewrights\par
of the Mountain, and we will make this a town to be proud of.'\par
'They need more gardens,' said Legolas. 'The houses are dead, and there\par
is too little here that grows and is glad. If Aragorn comes into his own, the\par
people of the Wood shall bring him birds that sing and trees that do not die.'\par
At length they came to the Prince Imrahil, and Legolas looked at him and\par
bowed low; for he saw that here indeed was one who had elven-blood in his\par
veins. 'Hail, lord!' he said. 'It is long since the people of Nimrodel left\par
the woodlands of L\'f3rien, and yet still one may see that not all sailed from\par
Amroth's haven west over water.'\par
'So it is said in the lore of my land,' said the Prince; 'yet never has\par
one of the fair folk been seen there for years beyond count. And I marvel to\par
see one here now in the midst of sorrow and war. What do you seek?'\par
'I am one of the Nine Companions who set out with Mithrandir from\par
Imladris, said Legolas and with this Dwarf, my friend, I came with the Lord\par
Aragorn. But now we wish to see our friends. Meriadoc and Peregrin, who are in\par
your keeping, we are told.'\par
'You will find them in the Houses of Healing, and I will lead you\par
thither,' said Imrahil.\par
'It will be enough if you send one to guide us, lord,' said Legolas. 'For\par
Aragorn sends this message to you. He does not wish to enter the City again at\par
this time. Yet there is need for the captains to hold council at once, and he\par
prays that you and \'c9omer of Rohan will come down to his tents, as soon as may\par
be. Mithrandir is already there.'\par
'We will come,' said Imrahil; and they parted with courteous words.\par
'That is a fair lord and a great captain of men,' said Legolas. 'If\par
Gondor has such men still in these days of fading, great must have been its\par
glory in the days of its rising.'\par
'And doubtless the good stone-work is the older and was wrought in the\par
first building,' said Gimli. 'It is ever so with the things that Men begin:\par
there is a frost in Spring, or a blight in Summer, and they fail of their\par
promise.'\par
'Yet seldom do they fail of their seed,' said Legolas. 'And that will lie\par
in the dust and rot to spring up again in times and places unlooked-for. The\par
deeds of Men will outlast us, Gimli.'\par
'And yet come to naught in the end but might-have-beens, I guess,' said\par
the Dwarf.\par
'To that the Elves know not the answer,' said Legolas.\par
With that the servant of the Prince came and led them to the Houses of\par
Healing; and there they found their friends in the garden, and their meeting\par
was a merry one. For a while they walked and talked, rejoicing for a brief\par
space in peace and rest under the morning high up in the windy circles of the\par
City. Then when Merry became weary, they went and sat upon the wall with the\par
greensward of the Houses of Healing behind them; and away southward before\par
them was the Anduin glittering in the sun, as it flowed away, out of the sight\par
even of Legolas, into the wide flats and green haze of Lebennin and South\par
Ithilien.\par
And now Legolas fell silent, while the others talked, and he looked out\par
against the sun, and as he gazed he saw white sea-birds beating up the River.\par
'Look!' he cried. 'Gulls! They are flying far inland. A wonder they are\par
to me and a trouble to my heart. Never in all my life had I met them, until we\par
came to Pelargir, and there I heard them crying in the air as we rode to the\par
battle of the ships. Then I stood still, forgetting war in Middle-earth; for\par
their wailing voices spoke to me of the Sea. The Sea! Alas! I have not yet\par
beheld it. But deep in the hearts of all my kindred lies the sea-longing,\par
which it is perilous to stir. Alas! for the gulls. No peace shall I have again\par
under beech or under elm.'\par
'Say not so!' said Gimli. 'There are countless things still to see in\par
Middle-earth, and great works to do. But if all the fair folk take to the\par
Havens, it will be a duller world for those who are doomed to stay.'\par
'Dull and dreary indeed!' said Merry: 'You must not go to the Havens,\par
Legolas. There will always be some folk, big or little, and even a few wise\par
dwarves like Gimli, who need you. At least I hope so. Though I feel somehow\par
that the worst of this war is still to come. How I wish it was all over, and\par
well over!'\par
'Don't be so gloomy!' cried Pippin. 'The Sun is shining, and here we are\par
together for a day or two at least. I want to hear more about you all. Come,\par
Gimli! You and Legolas have mentioned your strange journey with Strider about\par
a dozen times already this morning. But you haven't told me anything about\par
it.'\par
'The Sun may shine here,' said Gimli, 'but there are memories of that\par
road that I do not wish to recall out of the darkness. Had I known what was\par
before me, I think that not for any friendship would I have taken the Paths of\par
the Dead.'\par
'The Paths of the Dead?' said Pippin. 'I heard Aragorn say that and I\par
wondered what he could mean. Won't you tell us some more?'\par
'Not willingly,' said Gimli. 'For upon that road I was put to shame:\par
Gimli Gl\'f3in's son, who had deemed himself more tough than Men, and hardier\par
under earth than any Elf. But neither did I prove; and I was held to the road\par
only by the will of Aragorn.'\par
'And by the love of him also,' said Legolas. 'For all those who come to\par
know him come to love him after his own fashion, even the cold maiden of the\par
Rohirrim. It was at early morn of the day ere you came there, Merry, that we\par
left Dunharrow, and such a fear was on all the folk that none would look on\par
our going, save the Lady \'c9owyn, who lies now hurt in the House below. There\par
was grief at that parting, and I was grieved to behold it.'\par
'Alas! I had heart only for myself,' said Gimli. 'Nay! I will not speak\par
of that journey.'\par
He fell silent; but Pippin and Merry were so eager for news that at last\par
Legolas said: 'I will tell you enough for your peace; for I felt not the\par
horror, and I feared not the shadows of Men, powerless and frail as I deemed\par
them.'\par
Swiftly then he told of the haunted road under the mountains, and the\par
dark tryst at Erech, and the great ride thence, ninety leagues and three, to\par
Pelargir on Anduin. 'Four days and nights, and on into a fifth, we rode from\par
the Black Stone,' he said. 'And lo! in the darkness of Mordor my hope rose;\par
for in that gloom the Shadow Host seemed to grow stronger and more terrible to\par
look upon. Some I saw riding, some striding, yet all moving with the same\par
great speed. Silent they were, but there was a gleam in their eyes. In the\par
uplands of Lamedon they overtook our horses, and swept round us, and would\par
have passed us by, if Aragorn had not forbidden them.\par
'At his command they fell back. "Even the shades of Men are obedient to\par
his will," I thought. "They may serve his needs yet! "\par
'One day of light we rode, and then came the day without dawn, and still\par
we rode on, and Ciril and Ringl\'f3 we crossed; and on the third day we came to\par
Linhir above the mouth of Gilrain. And there men of Lamedon contested the\par
fords with fell folk of Umbar and Harad who had sailed up the river. But\par
defenders and foes alike gave up the battle and fled when we came, crying out\par
that the King of the Dead was upon them. Only Angbor, Lord of Lamedon, had the\par
heart to abide us; and Aragorn bade him gather his folk and come behind, if\par
they dared, when the Grey Host had passed.\par
' "At Pelargir the Heir of Isildur will have need of you," he said.\par
'Thus we crossed over Gilrain, driving the allies of Mordor in rout\par
before us; and then we rested a while. But soon Aragorn arose, saying: "Lo!\par
already Minas Tirith is assailed. I fear that it will fall ere we come to its\par
aid." So we mounted again before night had passed and went on with all the\par
speed that our horses could endure over the plains of Lebennin.'\par
Legolas paused and sighed, and turning his eyes southward softly he sang:\par
_Silver flow the streams from Celos to Erui\par
In the green fields of Lebennin!\par
Tall grows the grass there. In the wind from the Sea\par
The white lilies sway,\par
And the golden bells are shaken of mallos and alfirin\par
In the green fields of Lebennin,\par
In the wind from the Sea!_\par
'Green are those fields in the songs of my people; but they were dark\par
then, grey wastes in the blackness before us. And over the wide land,\par
trampling unheeded the grass and the flowers, we hunted our foes through a day\par
and a night, until we came at the bitter end to the Great River at last.\par
'Then I thought in my heart that we drew near to the Sea; for wide was\par
the water in the darkness, and sea-birds innumerable cried on its, shores.\par
Alas for the wailing of the gulls! Did not the Lady tell me to beware of them?\par
And now I cannot forget them.'\par
'For my part I heeded them not,' said Gimli; 'for we came then at last\par
upon battle in earnest. There at Pelargir lay the main fleet of Umbar, fifty\par
great ships and smaller vessels beyond count. Many of those that we pursued\par
had reached the havens before us, and brought their fear with them; and some\par
of the ships had put off, seeking to escape down the River or to reach the far\par
shore; and many of the smaller craft were ablaze. But the Haradrim, being now\par
driven to the brink, turned at bay, and they were fierce in despair; and they\par
laughed when they looked on us, for they were a great army still.\par
'But Aragorn halted and cried with a great voice: "Now come! By the Black\par
Stone I call you! " And suddenly the Shadow Host that had hung back at the\par
last came up like a grey tide, sweeping all away before it. Faint cries I\par
heard, and dim horns blowing, and a murmur as of countless far voices: it was\par
like the echo of some forgotten battle in the Dark Years long ago. Pale swords\par
were drawn; but I know not whether their blades would still bite, for the Dead\par
needed no longer any weapon but fear. None would withstand them.\par
'To every ship they came that was drawn up, and then they passed over the\par
water to those that were anchored; and all the mariners were filled with a\par
madness of terror and leaped overboard, save the slaves chained to the oars.\par
Reckless we rode among our fleeing foes, driving them like leaves, until we\par
came to the shore. And then to each of the great ships that remained Aragorn\par
sent one of the D\'fanedain, and they comforted the captives that were aboard,\par
and bade them put aside fear and be free.\par
'Ere that dark day ended none of the enemy were left to resist us all\par
were drowned, or were flying south in the hope to find their own lands upon\par
foot. Strange and wonderful I thought it that the designs of Mordor should be\par
overthrown by such wraiths of fear and darkness. With its own weapons was it\par
worsted!'\par
'Strange indeed,' said Legolas. 'In that hour I looked on Aragorn and\par
thought how great and terrible a Lord he might have become in the strength of\par
his will, had he taken the Ring to himself. Not for naught does Mordor fear\par
him. But nobler is his spirit than the understanding of Sauron; for is he not\par
of the children of L\'fathien? Never shall that line fail, though the years may\par
lengthen beyond count.'\par
'Beyond the eyes of the Dwarves are such foretellings,' said Gimli. 'But\par
mighty indeed was Aragorn that day. Lo! all the black fleet was in his hands;\par
and he chose the greatest ship to be his own, and he went up into it. Then he\par
let sound a great concourse of trumpets taken from the enemy; and the Shadow\par
Host withdrew to the shore. There they stood silent, hardly to be seen, save\par
for a red gleam in their eyes that caught the glare of the ships that were\par
burning. And Aragorn spoke in a loud voice to the Dead Men, crying:\par
' "Hear now the words of the Heir of Isildur! Your oath is fulfilled. Go\par
back and trouble not the valleys ever again! Depart and be at rest! "\par
'And thereupon the King of the Dead stood out before the host and broke\par
his spear and cast it down. Then he bowed low and turned away; and swiftly the\par
whole grey host drew off and vanished like a mist that is driven back by a\par
sudden wind; and it seemed to me that I awoke from a dream.\par
'That night we rested while others laboured. For there were many captives\par
set free, and many slaves released who had been folk of Gondor taken in raids;\par
and soon also there was a great gathering of men out of Lebennin and the\par
Ethir, and Angbor of Lamedon came up with all the horsemen that he could\par
muster. Now that the fear of the Dead was removed they came to aid us and to\par
look on the Heir of Isildur; for the rumour of that name had run like fire in\par
the dark.\par
'And that is near the end of our tale. For during that evening and night\par
many ships were made ready and manned; and in the morning the fleet set forth.\par
Long past it now seems, yet it was but the morn of the day ere yesterday, the\par
sixth since we rode from Dunharrow. But still Aragorn was driven by fear that\par
time was too short.\par
' "It is forty leagues and two from Pelargir to the landings at the\par
Harlond," he said. "Yet to the Harlond we must come tomorrow or fail utterly."\par
'The oars were now wielded by free men, and manfully they laboured; yet\par
slowly we passed up the Great River, for we strove against its stream, and\par
though that is not swift down in the South, we had no help of wind. Heavy\par
would my heart have been, for all our victory at the havens, if Legolas had\par
not laughed suddenly.\par
' "Up with your beard, Durin's son! " he said. "For thus is it spoken:\par
_Oft hope is born, when all is forlorn_." But what hope he saw from afar he\par
would not tell. When night came it did but deepen the darkness, and our hearts\par
were hot, for away in the North we saw a red glow under the cloud, and Aragorn\par
said: "Minas Tirith is burning."\par
'But at midnight hope was indeed born anew. Sea-crafty men of the Ethir\par
gazing southward spoke of a change coming with a fresh wind from the Sea. Long\par
ere day the masted ships hoisted sail; and our speed grew, until dawn whitened\par
the foam at our prows. And so it was, as you know, that we came in the third\par
hour of the morning with a fair wind and the Sun unveiled, and we unfurled the\par
great standard in battle. It was a great day and a great hour, whatever may\par
come after.'\par
'Follow what may, great deeds are not lessened in worth,' said Legolas.\par
'Great deed was the riding of the Paths of the Dead, and great it shall\par
remain, though none be left in Gondor to sing of it in the days that are to\par
come.'\par
'And that may well befall,' said Gimli. 'For the faces of Aragorn and\par
Gandalf are grave. Much I wonder what counsels they are taking in the tents\par
there below. For my part, like Merry, I wish that with our victory the war was\par
now over. Yet whatever is still to do, I hope to have a part in it, for the\par
honour of the folk of the Lonely Mountain.'\par
'And I for the folk of the Great Wood,' said Legolas, 'and for the love\par
of the Lord of the White Tree.'\par
Then the companions fell silent, but a while they sat there in the high\par
place, each busy with his own thoughts, while the Captains debated.\par
When the Prince Imrahil had parted from Legolas and Gimli, at once he\par
sent for \'c9omer; and he went down with him from the City, and they came to the\par
tents of Aragorn that were set up on the field not far from the place where\par
King Th\'e9oden had fallen. And there they took counsel together with Gandalf and\par
Aragorn and the sons of Elrond.\par
'My lords,' said Gandalf, 'listen to the words of the Steward of Gondor\par
before he died: _You may triumph on the fields of the Pelennor for a day, but\par
against the Power that has now arisen there is no victory_. I do not bid you\par
despair, as he did, but to ponder the truth in these words.\par
'The Stones of Seeing do not lie, and not even the Lord of Barad-d\'fbr can\par
make them do so. He can, maybe, by his will choose what things shall be seen\par
by weaker minds, or cause them to mistake the meaning of what they see.\par
Nonetheless it cannot be doubted that when Denethor saw great forces arrayed\par
against him in Mordor, and more still being gathered, he saw that which truly\par
is.\par
'Hardly has our strength sufficed to beat off the first great assault.\par
The next will be greater. This war then is without final hope, as Denethor\par
perceived. Victory cannot be achieved by arms, whether you sit here to endure\par
siege after siege, or march out to be overwhelmed beyond the River. You have\par
only a choice of evils; and prudence would counsel you to strengthen such\par
strong places as you have, and there await the onset; for so shall the time\par
before your end be made a little longer.'\par
'Then you would have us retreat to Minas Tirith, or Dol Amroth, or to\par
Dunharrow, and there sit like children on sand-castles when the tide is\par
flowing?' said Imrahil.\par
'That would be no new counsel,' said Gandalf. 'Have you not done this and\par
little more in all the days of Denethor? But no! I said this would be prudent.\par
I do not counsel prudence. I said victory could not be achieved by arms. I\par
still hope for victory, but not by arms. For into the midst of all these\par
policies comes the Ring of Power, the foundation of Barad-d\'fbr, and the hope of\par
Sauron.\par
'Concerning this thing, my lords, you now all know enough for the\par
understanding of our plight, and of Sauron's. If he regains it, your valour is\par
vain, and his victory will be swift and complete: so complete that none can\par
foresee the end of it while this world lasts. If it is destroyed, then he will\par
fall; and his fall will be so low that none can foresee his arising ever\par
again. For he will lose the best part of the strength that was native to him\par
in his beginning, and all that was made or begun with that power will crumble,\par
and he will be maimed for ever, becoming a mere spirit of malice that gnaws\par
itself in the shadows, but cannot again grow or take shape. And so a great\par
evil of this world will be removed.\par
'Other evils there are that may come; for Sauron is himself but a servant\par
or emissary. Yet it is not our part to master all the tides of the world, but\par
to do what is in us for the succour of those years wherein we are set,\par
uprooting the evil in the fields that we know, so that those who live after\par
may have clean earth to till. What weather they shall have is not ours to\par
rule.\par
'Now Sauron knows all this, and he knows that this precious thing which\par
he lost has been found again; but he does not yet know where it is, or so we\par
hope. And therefore he is now in great doubt. For if we have found this thing,\par
there are some among us with strength enough to wield it. That too he knows.\par
For do I not guess rightly, Aragorn, that you have shown yourself to him in\par
the Stone of Orthanc?'\par
'I did so ere I rode from the Hornburg,' answered Aragorn. 'I deemed that\par
the time was ripe, and that the Stone had come to me for just such a purpose.\par
It was then ten days since the Ring-bearer went east from Rauros, and the Eye\par
of Sauron, I thought, should be drawn out from his own land. Too seldom has he\par
been challenged since he returned to his Tower. Though if I had foreseen how\par
swift would be his onset in answer, maybe I should not have dared to show\par
myself. Bare time was given me to come to your aid.'\par
'But how is this?' asked \'c9omer. 'All is vain, you say, if he has the\par
Ring. Why should he think it not vain to assail us, if we have it?'\par
'He is not yet sure,' said Gandalf, 'and he has not built up his power by\par
waiting until his enemies are secure, as we have done. Also we could not learn\par
how to wield the full power all in a day. Indeed it can be used only by one\par
master alone, not by many; and he will look for a time of strife, ere one of\par
the great among us makes himself master and puts down the others. In that time\par
the Ring might aid him, if he were sudden.\par
'He is watching. He sees much and hears much. His Nazg\'fbl are still\par
abroad. They passed over this field ere the sunrise, though few of the weary\par
and sleeping were aware of them. He studies the signs: the Sword that robbed\par
him of his treasure re-made; the winds of fortune turning in our favour, and\par
the defeat unlooked-for of his first assault the fall of his great Captain.\par
'His doubt will be growing, even as we speak here. His Eye is now\par
straining towards us, blind almost to all else that is moving. So we must keep\par
it. Therein lies all our hope. This, then, is my counsel. We have not the\par
Ring. In wisdom or great folly it has been sent away to be destroyed, lest it\par
destroy us. Without it we cannot by force defeat his force. But we must at all\par
costs keep his Eye from his true peril. We cannot achieve victory by arms, but\par
by arms we can give the Ring-bearer his only chance, frail though it be.\par
'As Aragorn has begun, so we must go on. We must push Sauron to his last\par
throw. We must call out his hidden strength, so that he shall empty his land.\par
We must march out to meet him at once. We must make ourselves the bait, though\par
his jaws should close on us. He will take that bait, in hope and in greed, for\par
he will think that in such rashness he sees the pride of the new Ringlord: and\par
he will say: "So! he pushes out his neck too soon and too far. Let him come\par
on, and behold I will have him in a trap from which he cannot escape. There I\par
will crush him, and what he has taken in his insolence shall be mine again for\par
ever."\par
'We must walk open-eyed into that trap, with courage, but small hope for\par
ourselves. For, my lords, it may well prove that we ourselves shall perish\par
utterly in a black battle far from the living lands; so that even if Barad-d\'fbr\par
be thrown down, we shall not live to see a new age. But this, I deem, is our\par
duty. And better so than to perish nonetheless \endash  as we surely shall, if we sit\par
here \endash  and know as we die that no new age shall be.'\par
They were silent for a while. At length Aragorn spoke. 'As I have begun,\par
so I will go on. We come now to the very brink, where hope and despair are\par
akin. To waver is to fall. Let none now reject the counsels of Gandalf, whose\par
long labours against Sauron come at last to their test. But for him all would\par
long ago have been lost. Nonetheless I do not yet claim to command any man.\par
Let others choose as they will.'\par
Then said Elrohir: 'From the North we came with this purpose, and from\par
Elrond our father we brought this very counsel. We will not turn back.'\par
'As for myself,' said \'c9omer, 'I have little knowledge of these deep\par
matters; but I need it not. This I know, and it is enough, that as my friend\par
Aragorn succoured me and my people, so I will aid him when he calls. I will\par
go.'\par
'As for me,' said Imrahil, 'the Lord Aragorn I hold to be my liege-lord,\par
whether he claim it or no. His wish is to me a command. I will go also. Yet\par
for a while I stand in the place of the Steward of Gondor, and it is mine to\par
think first of its people. To prudence some heed must still be given. For we\par
must prepare against all chances, good as well as evil. Now, it may be that we\par
shall triumph, and while there is any hope of this, Gondor must be protected.\par
I would not have us return with victory to a City in ruins and a land ravaged\par
behind us. And yet we learn from the Rohirrim that there is an army still\par
unfought upon our northern flank.'\par
'That is true,' said Gandalf. 'I do not counsel you to leave the City all\par
unmanned. Indeed the force that we lead east need not be great enough for any\par
assault in earnest upon Mordor, so long as it be great enough to challenge\par
battle. And it must move soon. Therefore I ask the Captains: what force could\par
we muster and lead out in two days' time at the latest? And they must be hardy\par
men that go willingly, knowing their peril.'\par
'All are weary, and very many have wounds light or grievous,' said \'c9omer,\par
'and we have suffered much loss of our horses, and that is ill to bear. If we\par
must ride soon, then I cannot hope to lead even two thousands, and yet leave\par
as many for the defence of the City.'\par
'We have not only to reckon with those who fought on this field ' said\par
Aragorn. 'New strength is on the way from the southern fiefs, now that the\par
coasts have been rid. Four thousands I sent marching from Pelargir through\par
Lossarnach two days ago; and Angbor the fearless rides before them. If we set\par
out in two days more, they will draw nigh ere we depart. Moreover many were\par
bidden to follow me up the River in any craft they could gather; and with this\par
wind they will soon be at hand, indeed several ships have already come to the\par
Harlond. I judge that we could lead out seven thousands of horse and foot, and\par
yet leave the City in better defence than it was when the assault began.'\par
'The Gate is destroyed,' said Imrahil, 'and where now is the skill to\par
rebuild it and set it up anew?'\par
'In Erebor in the Kingdom of D\'e1in there is such skill,' said Aragorn;\par
'and if all our hopes do not perish, then in time I will send Gimli Gl\'f3in's\par
son to ask for wrights of the Mountain. But men are better than gates, and no\par
gate will endure against our Enemy if men desert it.'\par
This then was the end of the debate of the lords: that they should set\par
forth on the second morning from that day with seven thousands, if these might\par
be found; and the great part of this force should be on foot, because of the\par
evil lands into which they would go. Aragorn should find some two thousands of\par
those that he had gathered to him in the South; but Imrahil should find three\par
and a half thousands; and \'c9omer five hundreds of the Rohirrim who were\par
unhorsed but themselves warworthy, and he himself should lead five hundreds of\par
his best Riders on horse; and another company of five hundred horse there\par
should be, among which should ride the sons of Elrond with the D\'fanedain and\par
the knights of Dol Amroth: all told six thousand foot and a thousand horse.\par
But the main strength of the Rohirrim that remained horsed and able to fight,\par
some three thousand under the command of Elfhelm, should waylay the West Road\par
against the enemy that was in An\'f3rien. And at once swift riders were sent out\par
to gather what news they could northwards; and eastwards from Osgiliath and\par
the road to Minas Morgul.\par
And when they had reckoned up all their strength and taken thought for\par
the journeys they should make and the roads they should choose, Imrahil\par
suddenly laughed aloud.\par
'Surely,' he cried, 'this is the greatest jest in all the history of\par
Gondor: that we should ride with seven thousands, scarce as many as the\par
vanguard of its army in the days of its power, to assail the mountains and the\par
impenetrable gate of the Black Land! So might a child threaten a mail-clad\par
knight with a bow of string and green willow! If the Dark Lord knows so much\par
as you say, Mithrandir, will he not rather smile than fear, and with his\par
little finger crush us like a fly that tries to sting him?'\par
'No, he will try to trap the fly and take the sting,' said Gandalf. 'And\par
there are names among us that are worth more than a thousand mail-clad knights\par
apiece. No, he will not smile.'\par
'Neither shall we,' said Aragorn. 'If this be jest, then it is too bitter\par
for laughter. Nay, it is the last move in a great jeopardy, and for one side\par
or the other it will bring the end of the game.' Then he drew And\'faril and held\par
it up glittering in the sun. 'You shall not be sheathed again until the last\par
battle is fought;' he said.\par
_Chapter 10_\par
The Black Gate Opens\par
Two days later the army of the West was all assembled on the Pelennor.\par
The host of Orcs and Easterlings had turned back out of An\'f3rien, but harried\par
and scattered by the Rohirrim they had broken and fled with little fighting\par
towards Cair Andros; and with that threat destroyed and new strength arriving\par
out of the South the City was as well manned as might be. Scouts reported that\par
no enemies remained upon the roads east as far as the Cross-roads of the\par
Fallen King. All now was ready for the last throw.\par
Legolas and Gimli were to ride again together in the company of Aragorn\par
and Gandalf, who went in the van with the D\'fanedain and the sons of Elrond. But\par
Merry to his shame was not to go with them.\par
'You are not fit for such a journey,' said Aragorn. 'But do not be\par
ashamed. If you do no more in this war, you have already earned great honour.\par
Peregrin shall go and represent the Shirefolk; and do not grudge him his\par
chance of peril, for though he has done as well as his fortune allowed him, he\par
has yet to match your deed. But in truth all now are in like danger. Though it\par
may be our part to find bitter end before the Gate of Mordor, if we do so,\par
then you will come also to a last stand, either here or wherever the black\par
tide overtakes you. Farewell!'\par
And so despondently Merry now stood and watched the mustering of the\par
army. Bergil was with him, and he also was downcast; for his father was to\par
march leading a company of the Men of the City: he could not rejoin the Guard\par
until his case was judged. In that same company Pippin was also to go, as a\par
soldier of Gondor. Merry could see him not far off, a small but upright figure\par
among the tall men of Minas Tirith.\par
At last the trumpets rang and the army began to move. Troop by troop, and\par
company by company, they wheeled and went off eastward. And long after they\par
had passed away out of sight down the great road to the Causeway, Merry stood\par
there. The last glint of the morning sun on spear and helm twinkled and was\par
lost, and still he remained with bowed head and heavy heart, feeling\par
friendless and alone. Everyone that he cared for had gone away into the gloom\par
that hung over the distant eastern sky; and little hope at all was left in his\par
heart that he would ever see any of them again.\par
As if recalled by his mood of despair, the pain in his arm returned, and\par
he felt weak and old, and the sunlight seemed thin. He was roused by the touch\par
of Bergil's hand.\par
'Come, Master Perian!' said the lad. 'You are still in pain, I see. I\par
will help you back to the Healers. But do not fear! They will come back. The\par
Men of Minas Tirith will never be overcome. And now they have the Lord\par
Elfstone, and Beregond of the Guard too.'\par
Ere noon the army came to Osgiliath. There all the workers and craftsmen\par
that could be spared were busy. Some were strengthening the ferries and boatbridges\par
that the enemy had made and in part destroyed when they fled; some\par
gathered stores and booty; and others on the eastern side across the River\par
were throwing up hasty works of defence.\par
The vanguard passed on through the ruins of Old Gondor, and over the wide\par
River, and on up the long straight road that in the high days had been made to\par
run from the fair Tower of the Sun to the tall Tower of the Moon, which now\par
was Minas Morgul in its accursed vale. Five miles beyond Osgiliath they\par
halted, ending their first day's march.\par
But the horsemen pressed on and ere evening they came to the Cross-roads\par
and the great ring of trees, and all was silent. No sign of any enemy had they\par
seen, no cry or call had been heard, no shaft had sped from rock or thicket by\par
the way, yet ever as they went forward they felt the watchfulness of the land\par
increase. Tree and stone, blade and leaf were listening. The darkness had been\par
dispelled, and far away westward sunset was on the Vale of Anduin, and the\par
white peaks of the mountains blushed in the blue air; but a shadow and a gloom\par
brooded upon the Ephel D\'faath.\par
Then Aragorn set trumpeters at each of the four roads that ran into the\par
ring of trees, and they blew a great fanfare, and the heralds cried aloud:\par
'The Lords of Gondor have returned and all this land that is theirs they take\par
back.' The hideous orc-head that was set upon the carven figure was cast down\par
and broken in pieces, and the old king's head was raised and set in its place\par
once more, still crowned with white and golden flowers: and men laboured to\par
wash and pare away all the foul scrawls that orcs had put upon the stone.\par
Now in their debate some had counselled that Minas Morgul should first be\par
assailed, and if they might take it, it should be utterly destroyed. 'And,\par
maybe,' said Imrahil, 'the road that leads thence to the pass above will prove\par
an easier way of assault upon the Dark Lord than his northern gate.'\par
But against this Gandalf had spoken urgently, because of the evil that\par
dwelt in the valley, where the minds of living men would turn to madness and\par
horror, and because also of the news that Faramir had brought. For if the\par
Ring-bearer had indeed attempted that way, then above all they should not draw\par
the Eye of Mordor thither. So the next day when the main host came up, they\par
set a strong guard upon the Cross-roads to make some defence, if Mordor should\par
send a force over the Morgul Pass, or should bring more men up from the South.\par
For that guard they chose mostly archers who knew the ways of Ithilien and\par
would lie hid in the woods and slopes about the meeting of the ways. But\par
Gandalf and Aragorn rode with the vanguard to the entrance of Morgul Vale and\par
looked on the evil city.\par
It was dark and lifeless; for the Orcs and lesser creatures of Mordor\par
that had dwelt there had been destroyed in battle, and the Nazg\'fbl were abroad.\par
Yet the air of the valley was heavy with fear and enmity. Then they broke the\par
evil bridge and set red flames in the noisome fields and departed.\par
The day after, being the third day since they set out from Minas Tirith,\par
the army began its northward march along the road. It was some hundred miles\par
by that way from the Cross-roads to the Morannon, and what might befall them\par
before they came so far none knew They went openly but heedfully, with mounted\par
scouts before them on the road, and others on foot upon either side,\par
especially on the eastward flank; for there lay dark thickets, and a tumbled\par
land of rocky ghylls and crags, behind which the long grim slopes of the Ephel\par
D\'faath clambered up. The weather of the world remained fair and the wind held\par
in the west, but nothing could waft away the glooms and the sad mists that\par
clung about the Mountains of Shadow; and behind them at whiles great smokes\par
would arise and hover in the upper winds.\par
Ever and anon Gandalf let blow the trumpets, and the heralds would cry:\par
"The Lords of Gondor are come! Let all leave this land or yield them up!' But\par
Imrahil said: 'Say not _The Lords of Gondor_. Say _The King Elessar_. For that\par
is true, even though he has not yet sat upon the throne; and it will give the\par
Enemy more thought, if the heralds use that name.' And thereafter thrice a day\par
the heralds proclaimed the coming of the King Elessar. But none answered the\par
challenge.\par
Nonetheless, though they marched in seeming peace, the hearts of all the\par
army, from the highest to the lowest, were downcast, and with every mile that\par
they went north foreboding of evil grew heavier on them. It was near the end\par
of the second day of their march from the Cross-roads that they first met any\par
offer of battle. For a strong force of Orcs and Easterlings attempted to take\par
their leading companies in an ambush; and that was in the very place where\par
Faramir had waylaid the men of Harad, and the road went in a deep cutting\par
through an out-thrust of the eastward hills. But the Captains of the West were\par
well warned by their scouts, skilled men from Henneth Ann\'fbn led by Mablung;\par
and so the ambush was itself trapped. For horsemen went wide about westward\par
and came up on the flank of the enemy and from behind, and they were destroyed\par
or driven east into the hills.\par
But the victory did little to enhearten the captains. 'It is but a\par
feint,' said Aragorn; 'and its chief purpose, I deem, was rather to draw us on\par
by a false guess of our Enemy's weakness than to do us much hurt, yet.' And\par
from that evening onward the Nazg\'fbl came and followed every move of the army.\par
They still flew high and out of sight of all save Legolas, and yet their\par
presence could be felt, as a deepening of shadow and a dimming of the sun; and\par
though the Ringwraiths did not yet stoop low upon their foes and were silent,\par
uttering no cry, the dread of them could not be shaken off.\par
So time and the hopeless journey wore away. Upon the fourth day from the\par
Cross-roads and the sixth from Minas Tirith they came at last to the end of\par
the living lands, and began to pass into the desolation that lay before the\par
gates of the Pass of Cirith Gorgor; and they could descry the marshes and the\par
desert that stretched north and west to the Emyn Muil. So desolate were those\par
places and so deep the horror that lay on them that some of the host were\par
unmanned, and they could neither walk nor ride further north.\par
Aragorn looked at them, and there was pity in his eyes rather than wrath;\par
for these were young men from Rohan, from Westfold far away, or husbandmen\par
from Lossarnach, and to them Mordor had been from childhood a name of evil,\par
and yet unreal, a legend that had no part in their simple life; and now they\par
walked like men in a hideous dream made true, and they understood not this war\par
nor why fate should lead them to such a pass.\par
'Go!' said Aragorn. 'But keep what honour you may, and do not run! And\par
there is a task which you may attempt and so be not wholly shamed. Take your\par
way south-west till you come to Cair Andros, and if that is still held by\par
enemies, as I think, then re-take it, if you can; and hold it to the last in\par
defence of Gondor and Rohan!'\par
Then some being shamed by his mercy overcame their fear and went on, and\par
the others took new hope, hearing of a manful deed within their measure that\par
they could turn to, and they departed. And so, since many men had already been\par
left at the Cross-roads, it was with less than six thousands that the Captains\par
of the West came at last to challenge the Black Gate and the might of Mordor.\par
They advanced now slowly, expecting at every hour some answer to their\par
challenge, and they drew together, since it was but waste of men to send out\par
scouts or small parties from the main host. At nightfall of the fifth day of\par
the march from Morgul Vale they made their last camp, and set fires about it\par
of such dead wood and heath as they could find. They passed the hours of night\par
in wakefulness and they were aware of many things half-seen that walked and\par
prowled all about them, and they heard the howling of wolves. The wind had\par
died and all the air seemed still. They could see little, for though it was\par
cloudless and the waxing moon was four nights old, there were smokes and fumes\par
that rose out of the earth and the white crescent was shrouded in the mists of\par
Mordor.\par
It grew cold. As morning came the wind began to stir again, but now it\par
came from the North, and soon it freshened to a rising breeze. All the nightwalkers\par
were gone, and the land seemed empty. North amid their noisome pits\par
lay the first of the great heaps and hills of slag and broken rock and blasted\par
earth, the vomit of the maggot-folk of Mordor; but south and now near loomed\par
the great rampart of Cirith Gorgor, and the Black Gate amidmost, and the two\par
Towers of the Teeth tall and dark upon either side. For in their last march\par
the Captains had turned away from the old road as it bent east, and avoided\par
the peril of the lurking hills, and so now they were approaching the Morannon\par
from the north-west, even as Frodo had done.\par
The two vast iron doors of the Black Gate under its frowning arch were\par
fast closed. Upon the battlement nothing could be seen. All was silent but\par
watchful. They were come to the last end of their folly, and stood forlorn and\par
chill in the grey light of early day before towers and walls which their army\par
could not assault with hope, not even if it had brought thither engines of\par
great power, and the Enemy had no more force than would suffice for the\par
manning of the gate and wall alone. Yet they knew that all the hills and rocks\par
about the Morannon were filled with hidden foes, and the shadowy defile beyond\par
was bored and tunnelled by teeming broods of evil things. And as they stood\par
they saw all the Nazg\'fbl gathered together, hovering above the Towers of the\par
Teeth like vultures; and they knew that they were watched. But still the Enemy\par
made no sign.\par
No choice was left them but to play their part to its end. Therefore\par
Aragorn now set the host in such array as could best be contrived; and they\par
were drawn up on two great hills of blasted stone and earth that orcs had\par
piled in years of labour. Before them towards Mordor lay like a moat a great\par
mire of reeking mud and foul-smelling pools. When all was ordered, the\par
Captains rode forth towards the Black Gate with a great guard of horsemen and\par
the banner and heralds and trumpeters. There was Gandalf as chief herald, and\par
Aragorn with the sons of Elrond, and \'c9omer of Rohan, and Imrahil; and Legolas\par
and Gimli and Peregrin were bidden to go also, so that all the enemies of\par
Mordor should have a witness.\par
They came within cry of the Morannon, and unfurled the banner, and blew\par
upon their trumpets; and the heralds stood out and sent their voices up over\par
the battlement of Mordor.\par
'Come forth!' they cried. 'Let the Lord of the Black Land come forth!\par
Justice shall be done upon him. For wrongfully he has made war upon Gondor and\par
wrested its lands. Therefore the King of Gondor demands that he should atone\par
for his evils, and depart then for ever. Come forth!'\par
There was a long silence, and from wall and gate no cry or sound was\par
heard in answer. But Sauron had already laid his plans, and he had a mind\par
first to play these mice cruelly before he struck to kill. So it was that,\par
even as the Captains were about to turn away, the silence was broken suddenly.\par
There came a long rolling of great drums like thunder in the mountains, and\par
then a braying of horns that shook the very stones and stunned men's ears. And\par
thereupon the middle door of the Black Gate was thrown open with a great\par
clang, and out of it there came an embassy from the Dark Tower.\par
At its head there rode a tall and evil shape, mounted upon a black horse,\par
if horse it was; for it was huge and hideous, and its face was a frightful\par
mask, more like a skull than a living head, and in the sockets of its eyes and\par
in its nostrils there burned a flame. The rider was robed all in black, and\par
black was his lofty helm; yet this was no Ringwraith but a living man. The\par
Lieutenant of the Tower of Barad-d\'fbr he was, and his name is remembered in no\par
tale; for he himself had forgotten it, and he said: 'I am the Mouth of\par
Sauron.' But it is told that he was a renegade, who came of the race of those\par
that are named the Black N\'famen\'f3reans; for they established their dwellings in\par
Middle-earth during the years of Sauron's domination, and they worshipped him,\par
being enamoured of evil knowledge. And he entered the service of the Dark\par
Tower when it first rose again, and because of his cunning he grew ever higher\par
in the Lord's favour; and he learned great sorcery, and knew much of the mind\par
of Sauron; and he was more cruel than any orc.\par
He it was that now rode out, and with him came only a small company of\par
black-harnessed soldiery, and a single banner, black but bearing on it in red\par
the Evil Eye. Now halting a few paces before the Captains of the West he\par
looked them up and down and laughed.\par
'Is there anyone in this rout with authority to treat with me?' he asked.\par
'Or indeed with wit to understand me? Not thou at least!' he mocked, turning\par
to Aragorn with scorn. 'It needs more to make a king than a piece of elvish\par
glass, or a rabble such as this. Why, any brigand of the hills can show as\par
good a following!'\par
Aragorn said naught in answer, but he took the other's eye and held it,\par
and for a moment they strove thus; but soon, though Aragorn did not stir nor\par
move hand to weapon, the other quailed and gave back as if menaced with a\par
blow. 'I am a herald and ambassador, and may not be assailed!' he cried.\par
'Where such laws hold,' said Gandalf, 'it is also the custom for\par
ambassadors to use less insolence. But no one has threatened you. You have\par
naught to fear from us, until your errand is done. But unless your master has\par
come to new wisdom, then with all his servants you will be in great peril.'\par
'So!' said the Messenger. 'Then thou art the spokesman, old greybeard?\par
Have we not heard of thee at whiles, and of thy wanderings, ever hatching\par
plots and mischief at a safe distance? But this time thou hast stuck out thy\par
nose too far, Master Gandalf; and thou shalt see what comes to him who sets\par
his foolish webs before the feet of Sauron the Great. I have tokens that I was\par
bidden to show to thee \endash  to thee in especial, if thou shouldst dare to come.'\par
He signed to one of his guards, and he came forward bearing a bundle swathed\par
in black cloths.\par
The Messenger put these aside, and there to the wonder and dismay of all\par
the Captains he held up first the short sword that Sam had carried, and next a\par
grey cloak with an elven-brooch, and last the coat of mithril-mail that Frodo\par
had worn wrapped in his tattered garments. A blackness came before their eyes,\par
and it seemed to them in a moment of silence that the world stood still, but\par
their hearts were dead and their last hope gone. Pippin who stood behind\par
Prince Imrahil sprang forward with a cry of grief.\par
'Silence!' said Gandalf sternly, thrusting him back; but the Messenger\par
laughed aloud.\par
'So you have yet another of these imps with you!' he cried. 'What use you\par
find in them I cannot guess; but to send them as spies into Mordor is beyond\par
even your accustomed folly. Still, I thank him, for it is plain that this brat\par
at least has seen these tokens before, and it would be vain for you to deny\par
them now.'\par
'I do not wish to deny them,' said Gandalf. 'Indeed, I know them all and\par
all their history, and despite your scorn, foul Mouth of Sauron, you cannot\par
say as much. But why do you bring them here?'\par
'Dwarf-coat, elf-cloak, blade of the downfallen West, and spy from the\par
little rat-land of the Shire-nay; do not start! We know it well \endash  here are the\par
marks of a conspiracy. Now, maybe he that bore these things was a creature\par
that you would not grieve to lose, and maybe otherwise: one dear to you,\par
perhaps? If so, take swift counsel with what little wit is left to you. For\par
Sauron does not love spies, and what his fate shall be depends now on your\par
choice.'\par
No one answered him; but he saw their faces grey with fear and the horror\par
in their eyes, and he laughed again, for it seemed to him that his sport went\par
well. 'Good, good!' he said. 'He was dear to you, I see. Or else his errand\par
was one that you did not wish to fail? It has. And now he shall endure the\par
slow torment of years, as long and slow as our arts in the Great Tower can\par
contrive, and never be released, unless maybe when he is changed and broken,\par
so that he may come to you, and you shall see what you have done. This shall\par
surely be-unless you accept my Lord's terms.'\par
'Name the terms,' said Gandalf steadily, but those nearby saw the anguish\par
in his face, and now he seemed an old and wizened man, crushed, defeated at\par
last. They did not doubt that he would accept.\par
'These are the terms,' said the Messenger, and smiled as he eyed them one\par
by one. 'The rabble of Gondor and its deluded allies shall withdraw at once\par
beyond the Anduin, first taking oaths never again to assail Sauron the Great\par
in arms, open or secret. All lands east of Anduin shall be Sauron's for ever,\par
solely. West of the Anduin as far as the Misty Mountains and the Gap of Rohan\par
shall be tributary to Mordor, and men there shall bear no weapons, but shall\par
have leave to govern their own affairs. But they shall help to rebuild\par
Isengard which they have wantonly destroyed, and that shall be Sauron's, and\par
there his lieutenant shall dwell: not Saruman, but one more worthy of trust.'\par
Looking in the Messenger's eyes they read his thought. He was to be that\par
lieutenant, and gather all that remained of the West under his sway; he would\par
be their tyrant and they his slaves.\par
But Gandalf said: 'This is much to demand for the delivery of one\par
servant: that your Master should receive in exchange what he must else fight\par
many a war to gain! Or has the field of Gondor destroyed his hope in war, so\par
that he falls to haggling? And if indeed we rated this prisoner so high, what\par
surety have we that Sauron the Base Master of Treachery, will keep his part?\par
Where is this prisoner? Let him be brought forth and yielded to us, and then\par
we will consider these demands.'\par
It seemed then to Gandalf, intent, watching him as a man engaged in\par
fencing with a deadly foe, that for the taking of a breath the Messenger was\par
at a loss; yet swiftly he laughed again.\par
'Do not bandy words in your insolence with the Mouth of Sauron!' he\par
cried. 'Surety you crave! Sauron gives none. If you sue for his clemency you\par
must first do his bidding. These are his terms. Take them or leave them!'\par
'These we will take!' said Gandalf suddenly. He cast aside his cloak and\par
a white light shone forth like a sword in that black place. Before his\par
upraised hand the foul Messenger recoiled, and Gandalf coming seized and took\par
from him the tokens: coat, cloak, and sword. 'These we will take in memory of\par
our friend,' he cried. 'But as for your terms, we reject them utterly. Get you\par
gone, for your embassy is over and death is near to you. We did not come here\par
to waste words in treating with Sauron, faithless and accursed; still less\par
with one of his slaves. Begone!'\par
Then the Messenger of Mordor laughed no more. His face was twisted with\par
amazement and anger to the likeness of some wild beast that, as it crouches on\par
its prey, is smitten on the muzzle with a stinging rod. Rage filled him and\par
his mouth slavered, and shapeless sounds of fury came strangling from his\par
throat. But he looked at the fell faces of the Captains and their deadly eyes,\par
and fear overcame his wrath. He gave a great cry, and turned, leaped upon his\par
steed, and with his company galloped madly back to Cirith Gorgor. But as they\par
went his soldiers blew their horns in signal long arranged; and even before\par
they came to the gate Sauron sprang his trap.\par
Drums rolled and fires leaped up. The great doors of the Black Gate swung\par
back wide. Out of it streamed a great host as swiftly as swirling waters when\par
a sluice is lifted.\par
The Captains mounted again and rode back, and from the host of Mordor\par
there went up a jeering yell. Dust rose smothering the air, as from nearby\par
there marched up an army of Easterlings that had waited for the signal in the\par
shadows of Ered Lithui beyond the further Tower. Down from the hills on either\par
side of the Morannon poured Orcs innumerable. The men of the West were\par
trapped, and soon. all about the grey mounds where they stood, forces ten\par
times and more than ten times their match would ring them in a sea of enemies.\par
Sauron had taken the proffered bait in jaws of steel.\par
Little time was left to Aragorn for the ordering of his battle. Upon the\par
one hill he stood with Gandalf, and there fair and desperate was raised the\par
banner of the Tree and Stars. Upon the other hill hard by stood the banners of\par
Rohan and Dol Amroth, White Horse and Silver Swan. And about each hill a ring\par
was made facing all ways, bristling with spear and sword. But in the front\par
towards Mordor where the first bitter assault would come there stood the sons\par
of Elrond on the left with the D\'fanedain about them, and on the right the\par
Prince Imrahil with the men of Dol Amroth tall and fair, and picked men of the\par
Tower of Guard.\par
The wind blew, and the trumpets sang, and arrows whined; but the sun now\par
climbing towards the South was veiled in the reeks of Mordor, and through a\par
threatening haze it gleamed, remote, a sullen red, as if it were the ending of\par
the day, or the end maybe of all the world of light. And out of the gathering\par
mirk the Nazg\'fbl came with. their cold voices crying words of death; and then\par
all hope was quenched.\par
Pippin had bowed crushed with horror when he heard Gandalf reject the\par
terms and doom Frodo to the torment of the Tower; but he had mastered himself,\par
and now he stood beside Beregond in the front rank of Gondor with Imrahil's\par
men. For it seemed best to him to die soon and leave the bitter story of his\par
life, since all was in ruin.\par
'I wish Merry was here,' he heard himself saying, and quick thoughts\par
raced through his mind, even as he watched the enemy come charging to the\par
assault. 'Well, well, now at any rate I understand poor Denethor a little\par
better. We might die together, Merry and I, and since die we must, why not?\par
Well, as he is not here, I hope he'll find an easier end. But now I must do my\par
best.'\par
He drew his sword and looked at it, and the intertwining shapes of red\par
and gold; and the flowing characters of N\'famenor glinted like fire upon the\par
blade. 'This was made for just such an hour,' he thought. 'If only I could\par
smite that foul Messenger with it, then almost I should draw level with old\par
Merry. Well, I'll smite some of this beastly brood before the end. I wish I\par
could see cool sunlight and green grass again!'\par
Then even as he thought these things the first assault crashed into them.\par
The orcs hindered by the mires that lay before the hills halted and poured\par
their arrows into the defending ranks. But through them there came striding\par
up, roaring like beasts, a great company of hill-trolls out of Gorgoroth.\par
Taller and broader than Men they were, and they were clad only in closefitting\par
mesh of horny scales, or maybe that was their hideous hide; but they\par
bore round bucklers huge and black and wielded heavy hammers in their knotted\par
hands. Reckless they sprang into the pools and waded across, bellowing as they\par
came. Like a storm they broke upon the line of the men of Gondor, and beat\par
upon helm and head, and arm and shield as smiths hewing the hot bending iron.\par
At Pippin's side Beregond was stunned and overborne, and he fell; and the\par
great troll-chief that smote him down bent over him, reaching out a clutching\par
claw; for these fell creatures would bite the throats of those that they threw\par
down.\par
Then Pippin stabbed upwards, and the written blade of Westernesse pierced\par
through the hide and went deep into the vitals of the troll, and his black\par
blood came gushing out. He toppled forward and came crashing down like a\par
falling rock, burying those beneath him. Blackness and stench and crushing\par
pain came upon Pippin, and his mind fell away into a great darkness.\par
'So it ends as I guessed it would,' his thought said, even as it\par
fluttered away; and it laughed a little within him ere it fled, almost gay it\par
seemed to be casting off at last all doubt and care and fear. And then even as\par
it winged away into forgetfulness it heard voices, and they seemed to be\par
crying in some forgotten world far above:\par
'The Eagles are coming! The Eagles are coming!'\par
For one moment more Pippin's thought hovered. 'Bilbo!' it said. 'But no!\par
That came in his tale, long long ago. This is my tale, and it is ended now.\par
Good-bye!' And his thought fled far away and his eyes saw no more.\par
_Chapter 1_\par
The Tower of Cirith Ungol\par
Sam roused himself painfully from the ground. For a moment he wondered\par
where he was, and then all the misery and despair returned to him. He was in\par
the deep dark outside the under-gate of the orcs' stronghold; its brazen doors\par
were shut. He must have fallen stunned when he hurled himself against them;\par
but how long he had lain there he did not know. Then he had been on fire,\par
desperate and furious; now he was shivering and cold. He crept to the doors\par
and pressed his ears against them.\par
Far within he could hear faintly the voices of ores clamouring, but soon\par
they stopped or passed out of hearing, and all was still. His head ached and\par
his eyes saw phantom lights in the darkness, but he struggled to steady\par
himself and think. It was clear at any rate that he had no hope of getting\par
into the orc-hold by that gate; he might wait there for days before it was\par
opened, and he could not wait: time was desperately precious. He no longer had\par
any doubt about his duty: he must rescue his master or perish in the attempt.\par
'The perishing is more likely, and will be a lot easier anyway,' he said\par
grimly to himself, as he sheathed Sting and turned from the brazen doors.\par
Slowly he groped his way back in the dark along the tunnel, not daring to use\par
the elven-light; and as he went he tried to fit together the events since\par
Frodo and he had left the Cross-roads. He wondered what the time was.\par
Somewhere between one day and the next, he supposed; but even of the days he\par
had quite lost count. He was in a land of darkness where the days of the world\par
seemed forgotten, and where all who entered were forgotten too.\par
'I wonder if they think of us at all,' he said, 'and what is happening to\par
them all away there.' He waved his hand vaguely in the air before him; but he\par
was in fact now facing southwards, as he came back to Shelob's tunnel, not\par
west. Out westward in the world it was drawing to noon upon the fourteenth day\par
of March in the Shire-reckoning. And even now Aragorn was leading the black\par
fleet from Pelargir, and Merry was riding with the Rohirrim down the Stonewain\par
Valley, while in Minas Tirith flames were rising and Pippin watched the\par
madness growing in the eyes of Denethor. Yet amid all their cares and fear the\par
thoughts of their friends turned constantly to Frodo and Sam. They were not\par
forgotten. But they were far beyond aid, and no thought could yet bring any\par
help to Samwise Hamfast's son; he was utterly alone.\par
He came back at last to the stone door of the orc-passage, and still\par
unable to discover the catch or bolt that held it, he scrambled over as before\par
and dropped softly to the ground. Then he made his way stealthily to the\par
outlet of Shelob's tunnel, where the rags of her great web were still blowing\par
and swaying in the cold airs. For cold they seemed to Sam after the noisome\par
darkness behind; but the breath of them revived him. He crept cautiously out.\par
All was ominously quiet. The light was no more than that of dusk at a\par
dark day's end. The vast vapours that arose in Mordor and went streaming\par
westward passed low overhead, a great welter of cloud and smoke now lit again\par
beneath with a sullen glow of red.\par
Sam looked up towards the orc-tower, and suddenly from its narrow windows\par
lights stared out like small red eyes. He wondered if they were some signal.\par
His fear of the orcs, forgotten for a while in his wrath and desperation, now\par
returned. As far as he could see, there was only one possible course for him\par
to take: he must go on and try to find the main entrance to the dreadful\par
tower; but his knees felt weak, and he found that he was trembling. Drawing\par
his eyes down from the tower and the horns of the Cleft before him, he forced\par
his unwilling feet to obey him, and slowly, listening with all his ears,\par
peering into the dense shadows of the rocks beside the way, he retraced his\par
steps, past the place where Frodo fell, and still the stench of Shelob\par
lingered, and then on and up, until he stood again in the very cleft where he\par
had put on the Ring and seen Shagrat's company go by.\par
There he halted and sat down. For the moment he could drive himself no\par
further. He felt that if once he went beyond the crown of the pass and took\par
one step veritably down into the land of Mordor, that step would be\par
irrevocable. He could never come back. Without any clear purpose he drew out\par
the Ring and put it on again. Immediately he felt the great burden of its\par
weight, and felt afresh, but now more strong and urgent than ever, the malice\par
of the Eye of Mordor, searching, trying to pierce the shadows that it had made\par
for its own defence, but which now hindered it in its unquiet and doubt.\par
As before, Sam found that his hearing was sharpened, but that to his\par
sight the things of this world seemed thin and vague. The rocky walls of the\par
path were pale, as if seen through a mist, but still at a distance he heard\par
the bubbling of Shelob in her misery: and harsh and clear, and very close it\par
seemed, he heard cries and the clash of metal. He sprang to his feet, and\par
pressed himself against the wall beside the road. He was glad of the Ring, for\par
here was yet another company of orcs on the march. Or so at first he thought.\par
Then suddenly he realized that it was not so, his hearing had deceived him:\par
the orc-cries came from the tower, whose topmost horn was now right above him,\par
on the left hand of the Cleft.\par
Sam shuddered and tried to force himself to move. There was plainly some\par
devilry going on. Perhaps in spite of all orders the cruelty of the orcs had\par
mastered them, and they were tormenting Frodo, or even savagely hacking him to\par
pieces. He listened; and as he did a gleam of hope came to him. There could\par
not be much doubt: there was fighting in the tower, the orcs must be at war\par
among themselves, Shagrat and Gorbag had come to blows. Faint as was the hope\par
that his guess brought him, it was enough to rouse him. There might be just a\par
chance. His love for Frodo rose above all other thoughts, and forgetting his\par
peril he cried aloud: 'I'm coming, Mr. Frodo!'\par
He ran forward to the climbing path, and over it. At once the road turned\par
left and plunged steeply down. Sam had crossed into Mordor.\par
He took off the Ring, moved it may be by some deep premonition of danger,\par
though to himself he thought only that he wished to see more clearly. `Better\par
have a look at the worst,' he muttered. `No good blundering about in a fog!'\par
Hard and cruel and bitter was the land that met his gaze. Before his feet\par
the highest ridge of the Ephel D\'faath fell steeply in great cliffs down into a\par
dark trough, on the further side of which there rose another ridge, much\par
lower, its edge notched and jagged with crags like fangs that stood out black\par
against the red light behind them: it was the grim Morgai, the inner ring of\par
the fences of the land. Far beyond it, but almost straight ahead, across a\par
wide lake of darkness dotted with tiny fires, there was a great burning glow;\par
and from it rose in huge columns a swirling smoke, dusty red at the roots,\par
black above where it merged into the billowing canopy that roofed in all the\par
accursed land.\par
Sam was looking at Orodruin, the Mountain of Fire. Ever and anon the\par
furnaces far below its ashen cone would grow hot and with a great surging and\par
throbbing pour forth rivers of molten rock from chasms in its sides. Some\par
would flow blazing towards Barad-d\'fbr down great channels; some would wind\par
their way into the stony plain, until they cooled and lay like twisted dragonshapes\par
vomited from the tormented earth. In such an hour of labour Sam beheld\par
Mount Doom, and the light of it, cut off by the high screen of the Ephel D\'faath\par
from those who climbed up the path from the West, now glared against the stark\par
rock faces, so that they seemed to be drenched with blood.\par
In that dreadful light Sam stood aghast, for now, looking to his left, he\par
could see the Tower of Cirith Ungol in all its strength. The horn that he had\par
seen from the other side was only its topmost turret. Its eastern face stood\par
up in three great tiers from a shelf in the mountain-wall far below; its back\par
was to a great cliff behind, from which it jutted out in pointed bastions, one\par
above the other, diminishing as they rose, with sheer sides of cunning masonry\par
that looked north-east and south-east. About the lowest tier, two hundred feet\par
below where Sam now stood, there was a battlemented wall enclosing a narrow\par
court. Its gate, upon the near south-eastern side, opened on a broad road, the\par
outer parapet of which ran upon the brink of a precipice, until it turned\par
southward and went winding down into the darkness to join the road that came\par
over the Morgul Pass. Then on it went through a jagged rift in the Morgai out\par
into the valley of Gorgoroth and away to Barad-d\'fbr. The narrow upper way on\par
which Sam stood leapt swiftly down by stair and steep path to meet the main\par
road under the frowning walls close to the Tower-gate.\par
As he gazed at it suddenly Sam understood, almost with a shock, that this\par
stronghold had been built not to keep enemies out of Mordor, but to keep them\par
in. It was indeed one of the works of Gondor long ago, an eastern outpost of\par
the defences of Ithilien, made when, after the Last Alliance, Men of\par
Westernesse kept watch on the evil land of Sauron where his creatures still\par
lurked. But as with Narchost and Carchost, the Towers of the Teeth, so here\par
too the vigilance had failed, and treachery had yielded up the Tower to the\par
Lord of the Ringwraiths, and now for long years it had been held by evil\par
things. Since his return to Mordor, Sauron had found it useful; for he had few\par
servants but many slaves of fear, and still its chief purpose as of old was to\par
prevent escape from Mordor. Though if an enemy were so rash as to try to enter\par
that land secretly, then it was also a last unsleeping guard against any that\par
might pass the vigilance of Morgul and of Shelob.\par
Only too clearly Sam saw how hopeless it would be for him to creep down\par
under those many-eyed walls and pass the watchful gate. And even if he did so,\par
he could not go far on the guarded road beyond: not even the black shadows,\par
lying deep where the red glow could not reach, would shield him long from the\par
night-eyed orcs. But desperate as that road might be, his task was now far\par
worse: not to avoid the gate and escape, but to enter it, alone.\par
His thought turned to the Ring, but there was no comfort there, only\par
dread and danger. No sooner had he come in sight of Mount Doom, burning far\par
away, than he was aware of a change in his burden. As it drew near the great\par
furnaces where, in the deeps of time, it had been shaped and forged, the\par
Ring's power grew, and it became more fell, untameable save by some mighty\par
will. As Sam stood there, even though the Ring was not on him but hanging by\par
its chain about his neck, he felt himself enlarged, as if he were robed in a\par
huge distorted shadow of himself, a vast and ominous threat halted upon the\par
walls of Mordor. He felt that he had from now on only two choices: to forbear\par
the Ring, though it would torment him; or to claim it, and challenge the Power\par
that sat in its dark hold beyond the valley of shadows. Already the Ring\par
tempted him, gnawing at his will and reason. Wild fantasies arose in his mind;\par
and he saw Samwise the Strong, Hero of the Age, striding with a flaming sword\par
across the darkened land, and armies flocking to his call as he marched to the\par
overthrow of Barad-d\'fbr. And then all the clouds rolled away, and the white sun\par
shone, and at his command the vale of Gorgoroth became a garden of flowers and\par
trees and brought forth fruit. He had only to put on the Ring and claim it for\par
his own, and all this could be.\par
In that hour of trial it was the love of his master that helped most to\par
hold him firm; but also deep down in him lived still unconquered his plain\par
hobbit-sense: he knew in the core of his heart that he was not large enough to\par
bear such a burden, even if such visions were not a mere cheat to betray him.\par
The one small garden of a free gardener was all his need and due, not a garden\par
swollen to a realm; his own hands to use, not the hands of others to command.\par
'And anyway all these notions are only a trick,' he said to himself.\par
'He'd spot me and cow me, before I could so much as shout out. He'd spot me,\par
pretty quick, if I put the Ring on now, in Mordor. Well, all I can say is:\par
things look as hopeless as a frost in spring. Just when being invisible would\par
be really useful, I can't use the Ring! And if ever I get any further, it's\par
going to be nothing but a drag and a burden every step. So what's to be done?'\par
He was not really in any doubt. He knew that he must go down to the gate\par
and not linger any more. With a shrug of his shoulders, as if to shake off the\par
shadow and dismiss the phantoms, he began slowly to descend. With each step he\par
seemed to diminish. He had not gone far before he had shrunk again to a very\par
small and frightened hobbit. He was now passing under the very walls of the\par
Tower, and the cries and sounds of fighting could be heard with his unaided\par
ears. At the moment the noise seemed to be coming from the court behind the\par
outer wall.\par
Sam was about half way down the path when out of the dark gateway into\par
the red glow there came two orcs running. They did not turn towards him. They\par
were making for the main road; but even as they ran they stumbled and fell to\par
the ground and lay still. Sam had seen no arrows, but he guessed that the orcs\par
had been shot down by others on the battlements or hidden in the shadow of the\par
gate. He went on, hugging the wall on his left. One look upward had shown him\par
that there was no hope of climbing it. The stone-work rose thirty feet,\par
without a crack or ledge, to overhanging courses like inverted steps. The gate\par
was the only way.\par
He crept on; and as he went he wondered how many orcs lived in the Tower\par
with Shagrat, and how many Gorbag had, and what they were quarrelling about,\par
if that was what was happening. Shagrat's company had seemed to be about\par
forty, and Gorbag's more than twice as large; but of course Shagrat's patrol\par
had only been a part of his garrison. Almost certainly they were quarrelling\par
about Frodo, and the spoil. For a second Sam halted, for suddenly things\par
seemed clear to him, almost as if he had seen them with his eyes. The mithril\par
coat! Of course, Frodo was wearing it, and they would find it. And from what\par
Sam had heard Gorbag would covet it. But the orders of the Dark Tower were at\par
present Frodo's only protection, and if they were set aside, Frodo might be\par
killed out of hand at any moment.\par
'Come on, you miserable sluggard!' Sam cried to himself. `Now for it!' He\par
drew Sting and ran towards the open gate. But just as he was about to pass\par
under its great arch he felt a shock: as if he had run into some web like\par
Shelob's, only invisible. He could see no obstacle, but something too strong\par
for his will to overcome barred the way. He looked about, and then within the\par
shadow of the gate he saw the Two Watchers.\par
They were like great figures seated upon thrones. Each had three joined\par
bodies, and three heads facing outward, and inward, and across the gateway.\par
The heads had vulture-faces, and on their great knees were laid clawlike\par
hands. They seemed to be carved out of huge blocks of stone, immovable, and\par
yet they were aware: some dreadful spirit of evil vigilance abode in them.\par
They knew an enemy. Visible or invisible none could pass unheeded. They would\par
forbid his entry, or his escape.\par
Hardening his will Sam thrust forward once again, and halted with a jerk,\par
staggering as if from a blow upon his breast and head. Then greatly daring,\par
because he could think of nothing else to do, answering a sudden thought that\par
came to him, he drew slowly out the phial of Galadriel and held it up. Its\par
white light quickened swiftly, and the shadows under the dark arch fled. The\par
monstrous Watchers sat there cold and still, revealed in all their hideous\par
shape. For a moment Sam caught a glitter in the black stones of their eyes,\par
the very malice of which made him quail; but slowly he felt their will waver\par
and crumble into fear.\par
He sprang past them; but even as he did so, thrusting the phial back into\par
his bosom, he was aware, as plainly as if a bar of steel had snapped to behind\par
him, that their vigilance was renewed. And from those evil heads there came a\par
high shrill cry that echoed in the towering walls before him. Far up above,\par
like an answering signal, a harsh bell clanged a single stroke.\par
'That's done it!' said Sam. `Now I've rung the front-door bell! Well,\par
come on somebody!' he cried. `Tell Captain Shagrat that the great Elf-warrior\par
has called, with his elf-sword too!'\par
There was no answer. Sam strode forward. Sting glittered blue in his\par
hand. The courtyard lay in deep shadow, but he could see that the pavement was\par
strewn with bodies. Right at his feet were two orc-archers with knives\par
sticking in their backs. Beyond lay many more shapes; some singly as they had\par
been hewn down or shot; others in pairs, still grappling one another, dead in\par
the very throes of stabbing, throttling, biting. The stones were slippery with\par
dark blood.\par
Two liveries Sam noticed, one marked by the Red Eye, the other by a Moon\par
disfigured with a ghastly face of death; but he did not stop to look more\par
closely. Across the court a great door at the foot of the Tower stood half\par
open, and a red light came through; a large orc lay dead upon the threshold.\par
Sam sprang over the body and went in; and then he peered about at a loss.\par
A wide and echoing passage led back from the door towards the mountainside.\par
It was dimly lit with torches flaring in brackets on the walls, but its\par
distant end was lost in gloom. Many doors and openings could be seen on this\par
side and that; but it was empty save for two or three more bodies sprawling on\par
the floor. From what he had heard of the captains' talk Sam knew that, dead or\par
alive, Frodo would most likely be found in a chamber high up in the turret far\par
above; but he might search for a day before he found the way.\par
'It'll be near the back, I guess,' Sam muttered. `The whole Tower climbs\par
backwards-like. And anyway I'd better follow these lights.'\par
He advanced down the passage, but slowly now, each step more reluctant.\par
Terror was beginning to grip him again. There was no sound save the rap of his\par
feet, which seemed to grow to an echoing noise, like the slapping of great\par
hands upon the stones. The dead bodies: the emptiness; the dank black walls\par
that in the torchlight seemed to drip with blood; the fear of sudden death\par
lurking in doorway or shadow; and behind all his mind the waiting watchful\par
malice at the gate: it was almost more than he could screw himself to face. He\par
would have welcomed a fight-with not too many enemies at a time \endash  rather than\par
this hideous brooding uncertainty. He forced himself to think of Frodo, lying\par
bound or in pain or dead somewhere in this dreadful place. He went on.\par
He had passed beyond the torchlight, almost to a great arched door at the\par
end of the passage, the inner side of the under gate, as he rightly guessed,\par
when there came from high above a dreadful choking shriek. He stopped short.\par
Then he heard feet coming. Someone was running in great haste down an echoing\par
stairway overhead.\par
His will was too weak and slow to restrain his hand. It dragged at the\par
chain and clutched the Ring. But Sam did not put it on; for even as he clasped\par
it to his breast, an orc came clattering down. Leaping out of a dark opening\par
at the right, it ran towards him. It was no more than six paces from him when,\par
lifting its head, it saw him; and Sam could hear its gasping breath and see\par
the glare in its bloodshot eyes. It stopped short aghast. For what it saw was\par
not a small frightened hobbit trying to hold a steady sword: it saw a great\par
silent shape, cloaked in a grey shadow, looming against the wavering light\par
behind; in one hand it held a sword, the very light of which was a bitter\par
pain, the other was clutched at its breast, but held concealed some nameless\par
menace of power and doom.\par
For a moment the orc crouched, and then with a hideous yelp of fear it\par
turned and fled back as it had come. Never was any dog more heartened when its\par
enemy turned tail than Sam at this unexpected flight. With a shout he gave\par
chase.\par
`Yes! The Elf-warrior is loose!' he cried. 'I'm coming. Just you show me\par
the way up, or I'll skin you!'\par
But the orc was in its own haunts, nimble and well-fed. Sam was a\par
stranger, hungry and weary. The stairs were high and steep and winding. Sam's\par
breath began to come in gasps. The orc had soon passed out of sight, and now\par
only faintly could be heard the slapping of its feet as it went on and up.\par
Every now and again it gave a yell, and the echo ran along the walls. But\par
slowly all sound of it died away.\par
Sam plodded on. He felt that he was on the right road, and his spirits\par
had risen a good deal. He thrust the Ring away and tightened his belt. `Well,\par
well!' he said. `If only they all take such a dislike to me and my Sting, this\par
may turn out better than I hoped. And anyway it looks as if Shagrat, Gorbag,\par
and company have done nearly all my job for me. Except for that little\par
frightened rat, I do believe there's nobody left alive in the place!'\par
And with that he stopped, brought up hard, as if he had hit his head\par
against the stone wall. The full meaning of what he had said struck him like a\par
blow. Nobody left alive! Whose had been that horrible dying shriek? `Frodo,\par
Frodo! Master!' he cried half sobbing. 'If they've killed you, what shall I\par
do? Well, I'm coming at last, right to the top, to see what I must.'\par
Up, up he went. It was dark save for an occasional torch flaring at a\par
turn, or beside some opening that led into the higher levels of the Tower. Sam\par
tried to count the steps, but after two hundred he lost his reckoning. He was\par
moving quietly now: for he thought that he could hear the sound of voices\par
talking, still some way above. More than one rat remained alive, it seemed.\par
All at once, when he felt that he could pump out no more breath, nor\par
force his knees to bend again, the stair ended. He stood still. The voices\par
were now loud and near. Sam peered about. He had climbed right to the flat\par
roof of the third and highest tier of the Tower: an open space, about twenty\par
yards across, with a low parapet. There the stair was covered by a small domed\par
chamber in the midst of the roof, with low doors facing east and west.\par
Eastward Sam could see the plain of Mordor vast and dark below, and the\par
burning mountain far away. A fresh turmoil was surging in its deep wells, and\par
the rivers of fire blazed so fiercely that even at this distance of many miles\par
the light of them lit the tower-top with a red glare. Westward the view was\par
blocked by the base of the great turret that stood at the back of this upper\par
court and reared its horn high above the crest of the encircling hills. Light\par
gleamed in a window-slit. Its door was not ten yards from where Sam stood. It\par
was open but dark, and from just within its shadow the voices came.\par
At first Sam did not listen; he took a pace out of the eastward door and\par
looked about. At once he saw that up here the fighting had been fiercest. All\par
the court was choked with dead orcs or their severed and scattered heads and\par
limbs. The place stank of death. A snarl followed by a blow and a cry sent him\par
darting back into hiding. An orc-voice rose in anger, and he knew it again at\par
once, harsh, brutal, cold. It was Shagrat speaking, Captain of the Tower.\par
`You won't go again, you say? Curse you, Snaga, you little maggot! If you\par
think I'm so damaged that it's safe to flout me, you're mistaken Come here,\par
and I'll squeeze your eyes out, like I did to Radbug just now. And when some\par
new lads come, I'll deal with you: I'll send you to Shelob.'\par
`They won't come, not before you're dead anyway,' answered Snaga surlily.\par
'I've told you twice that Gorbag's swine got to the gate first, and none of\par
ours got out. Lagduf and Muzgash ran through, but they were shot. I saw it\par
from a window, I tell you. And they were the last.'\par
'Then you must go. I must stay here anyway. But I'm hurt. The Black Pits\par
take that filthy rebel Gorbag!' Shagrat's voice trailed off into a string of\par
foul names and curses. `I gave him better than I got, but he knifed me, the\par
dung, before I throttled him. You must go, or I'll eat you. News must get\par
through to Lugb\'farz, or we'll both be for the Black Pits. Yes, you too. You\par
won't escape by skulking here.'\par
`I'm not going down those stairs again,' growled Snaga, `be you captain\par
or no. Nar! Keep your hands off your knife, or I'll put an arrow in your guts.\par
You won't be a captain long when They hear about all these goings-on. I've\par
fought for the Tower against those stinking Morgul-rats, but a nice mess you\par
two precious captains have made of things, fighting over the swag.'\par
'That's enough from you,' snarled Shagrat. `I had my orders. It was\par
Gorbag started it, trying to pinch that pretty shirt.'\par
`Well, you put his back up, being so high and mighty. And he had more\par
sense than you anyway. He told you more than once that the most dangerous of\par
these spies was still loose, and you wouldn't listen. And you won't listen\par
now. Gorbag was right, I tell you. There's a great fighter about, one of those\par
bloody-handed Elves, or one of the filthy _tarks_.*1 He's coming here, I tell\par
you. You heard the bell. He's got past the Watchers, and that's _tark's_ work.\par
He's on the stairs. And until he's off them, I'm not going down. Not if you\par
were a Nazg\'fbl, I wouldn't.'\par
`So that's it, is it?' yelled Shagrat. 'You'll do this, and you'll not do\par
that? And when he does come, you'll bolt and leave me? No, you won't! I'll put\par
red maggot-holes in your belly first.'\par
Out of the turret-door the smaller orc came flying. Behind him came\par
Shagrat, a large orc with long arms that, as he ran crouching, reached to the\par
ground. But one arm hung limp and seemed to be bleeding; the other hugged a\par
large black bundle. In the red glare Sam, cowering behind the stair-door,\par
caught a glimpse of his evil face as it passed: it was scored as if by rending\par
claws and smeared with blood; slaver dripped from its protruding fangs; the\par
mouth snarled like an animal.\par
As far as Sam could see, Shagrat hunted Snaga round the roof, until\par
ducking and eluding him the smaller orc with a yelp darted back into the\par
turret and disappeared. Then Shagrat halted. Out of the eastward door Sam\par
could see him now by the parapet, panting, his left claw clenching and\par
unclenching feebly. He put the bundle on the floor and with his right claw\par
drew out a long red knife and spat on it. Going to the parapet he leaned over,\par
looking down into the outer court far below. Twice he shouted but no answer\par
came.\par
Suddenly, as Shagrat was stooped over the battlement, his back to the\par
roof-top, Sam to his amazement saw that one of the sprawling bodies was\par
moving. It was crawling. It put out a claw and clutched the bundle. It\par
staggered up. In its other hand it held a broad-headed spear with a short\par
broken haft. It was poised for a stabbing thrust. But at that very moment a\par
hiss escaped its teeth, a gasp of pain or hate. Quick as a snake Shagrat\par
slipped aside, twisted round, and drove his knife into his enemy's throat.\par
`Got you, Gorbag!' he cried. 'Not quite dead, eh? Well, I'll finish my\par
job now.' He sprang on to the fallen body, and stamped and trampled it in his\par
fury, stooping now and again to stab and slash it with his knife. Satisfied at\par
last, he threw back his head and let out a horrible gurgling yell of triumph.\par
Then he licked his knife, and put it between his teeth, and catching up the\par
bundle he came loping towards the near door of the stairs.\par
Sam had no time to think. He might have slipped out of the other door,\par
but hardly without being seen; and he could not have played hide-and-seek with\par
this hideous orc for long. He did what was probably the best thing he could\par
have done. He sprang out to meet Shagrat with a shout. He was no longer\par
holding the Ring, but it was there, a hidden power, a cowing menace to the\par
slaves of Mordor; and in his hand was Sting, and its light smote the eyes of\par
the orc like the glitter of cruel stars in the terrible elf-countries, the\par
dream of which was a cold fear to all his kind. And Shagrat could not both\par
fight and keep hold of his treasure. He stopped, growling, baring his fangs.\par
Then once more, orc-fashion, he leapt aside, and as Sam sprang at him, using\par
the heavy bundle as both shield and weapon, he thrust it hard into his enemy's\par
face. Sam staggered, and before he could recover, Shagrat darted past and down\par
the stairs.\par
Sam ran after him, cursing, but he did not go far. Soon the thought of\par
Frodo returned to him, and he remembered that the other orc had gone back into\par
the turret. Here was another dreadful choice, and he had no time to ponder it.\par
If Shagrat got away, he would soon get help and come back. But if Sam pursued\par
him, the other orc might do some horrible deed up there. And anyway Sam might\par
miss Shagrat or be killed by him. He turned quickly and ran back up the\par
stairs. `Wrong again, I expect,' he sighed. `But it's my job to go right up to\par
the top first, whatever happens afterwards.'\par
Away below Shagrat went leaping down the stairs and out over the court\par
and through the gate, bearing his precious burden. If Sam could have seen him\par
and known the grief that his escape would bring, he might have quailed. But\par
now his mind was set on the last stage of his search. He came cautiously to\par
the turret-door and stepped inside. It opened into darkness. But soon his\par
staring eyes were aware of a dim light at his right hand. It came from an\par
opening that led to another stairway, dark and narrow: it appeared to go\par
winding up the turret along the inside of its round outer wall. A torch was\par
glimmering from somewhere up above.\par
Softly Sam began to climb. He came to the guttering torch, fixed above a\par
door on his left that faced a window-slit looking out westward: one of the red\par
eyes that he and Frodo had seen from down below by the tunnel's mouth. Quickly\par
Sam passed the door and hurried on to the second storey, dreading at any\par
moment to he attacked and to feel throttling fingers seize his throat from\par
behind. He came next to a window looking east and another torch above the door\par
to a passage through the middle of the turret. The door was open, the passage\par
dark save for the glimmer of the torch and the red glare from outside\par
filtering through the window-slit. But here the stair stopped and climbed no\par
further. Sam crept into the passage. On either side there was a low door; both\par
were closed and locked. There was no sound at all.\par
`A dead end,' muttered Sam; `and after all my climb! This can't be the\par
top of the tower. But what can I do now?'\par
He ran back to the lower storey and tried the door. It would not move. He\par
ran up again, and sweat began to trickle down his face. He felt that even\par
minutes were precious, but one by one they escaped; and he could do nothing.\par
He cared no longer for Shagrat or Snaga or any other orc that was ever\par
spawned. He longed only for his master, for one sight of his face or one touch\par
of his hand.\par
At last, weary and feeling finally defeated, he sat on a step below the\par
level of the passage-floor and bowed his head into his hands. It was quiet,\par
horribly quiet. The torch, that was already burning low when he arrived,\par
sputtered and went out; and he felt the darkness cover him like a tide. And\par
then softly, to his own surprise, there at the vain end of his long journey\par
and his grief, moved by what thought in his heart he could not tell, Sam began\par
to sing.\par
His voice sounded thin and quavering in the cold dark tower: the voice of\par
a forlorn and weary hobbit that no listening orc could possibly mistake for\par
the clear song of an Elven-lord. He murmured old childish tunes out of the\par
Shire, and snatches of Mr. Bilbo's rhymes that came into his mind like\par
fleeting glimpses of the country of his home. And then suddenly new strength\par
rose in him, and his voice rang out, while words of his own came unbidden to\par
fit the simple tune.\par
_In western lands beneath the Sun\par
the flowers may rise in Spring,\par
the trees may bud, the waters run,\par
the merry finches sing.\par
Or there maybe 'tis cloudless night\par
and swaying beeches bear\par
the Elven-stars as jewels white\par
amid their branching hair.\par
Though here at journey's end I lie\par
in darkness buried deep,\par
beyond all towers strong and high,\par
beyond all mountains steep,\par
above all shadows rides the Sun\par
and Stars for ever dwell:\par
I will not say the Day is done,\par
nor bid the Stars farewell._\par
`Beyond all towers strong and high,' he began again, and then he stopped\par
short. He thought that he had heard a faint voice answering him. But now he\par
could hear nothing. Yes, he could hear something, but not a voice. Footsteps\par
were approaching. Now a door was being opened quietly in the passage above;\par
the hinges creaked. Sam crouched down listening. The door closed with a dull\par
thud; and then a snarling orc-voice rang out.\par
'Ho la! You up there, you dunghill rat! Stop your squeaking, or I'll come\par
and deal with you. D'you hear?'\par
There was no answer.\par
'All right,' growled Snaga. `But I'll come and have a look at you all the\par
same, and see what you're up to.'\par
The hinges creaked again, and Sam, now peering over the corner of the\par
passage-threshold, saw a flicker of light in an open doorway, and the dim\par
shape of an orc coming out. He seemed to be carrying a ladder. Suddenly the\par
answer dawned on Sam: the topmost chamber was reached by a trap-door in the\par
roof of the passage. Snaga thrust the ladder upwards, steadied it, and then\par
clambered out of sight. Sam heard a bolt drawn back. Then he heard the hideous\par
voice speaking again.\par
`You lie quiet, or you'll pay for it! You've not got long to live in\par
peace, I guess; but if you don't want the fun to begin right now, keep your\par
trap shut, see? There's a reminder for you!' There was a sound like the crack\par
of a whip.\par
At that rage blazed in Sam's heart to a sudden fury. He sprang up, ran,\par
and went up the ladder like a cat. His head came out in the middle of the\par
floor of a large round chamber. A red lamp hung from its roof; the westward\par
window-slit was high and dark. Something was lying on the floor by the wall\par
under the window, but over it a black orc-shape was straddled. It raised a\par
whip a second time, but the blow never fell.\par
With a cry Sam leapt across the floor, Sting in hand. The orc wheeled\par
round, but before it could make a move Sam slashed its whip-hand from its arm.\par
Howling with pain and fear but desperate the orc charged head-down at him.\par
Sam's next blow went wide, and thrown off his balance he fell backwards,\par
clutching at the orc as it stumbled over him. Before he could scramble up he\par
heard a cry and a thud. The orc in its wild haste had tripped on the ladderhead\par
and fallen through the open trap-door. Sam gave no more thought to it. He\par
ran to the figure huddled on the floor. It was Frodo.\par
He was naked, lying as if in a swoon on a heap of filthy rags: his arm\par
was flung up, shielding his head, and across his side there ran an ugly whipweal.\par
`Frodo! Mr. Frodo, my dear!' cried Sam, tears almost blinding him. `It's\par
Sam, I've come!' He half lifted his master and hugged him to his breast. Frodo\par
opened his eyes.\par
`Am I still dreaming?' he muttered. `But the other dreams were horrible.'\par
`You're not dreaming at all, Master,' said Sam. `It's real. It's me. I've\par
come.'\par
`I can hardly believe it,' said Frodo, clutching him. `There was an orc\par
with a whip, and then it turns into Sam! Then I wasn't dreaming after all when\par
I heard that singing down below, and I tried to answer? Was it you?'\par
'It was indeed, Mr. Frodo. I'd given up hope, almost. I couldn't find\par
you.\par
Well, you have now, Sam, dear Sam, said Frodo, and he la back in Sam's\par
gentle arms, closing his eyes, like a child at rest when night-fears are\par
driven away by some loved voice or hand.\par
Sam felt that he could sit like that in endless happiness; but it was not\par
allowed. It was not enough for him to find his master, he had still to try and\par
save him. He kissed Frodo's forehead. `Come! Wake up Mr. Frodo!' he said,\par
trying to sound as cheerful as he had when he drew back the curtains at Bag\par
End on a summer's morning.\par
Frodo sighed and sat up. `Where are we? How did I get here?' he asked.\par
'There's no time for tales till we get somewhere else, Mr. Frodo,' said\par
Sam. `But you're in the top of that tower you and me saw from away down by the\par
tunnel before the orcs got you. How long ago that was I don't know. More than\par
a day, I guess.'\par
`Only that?' said Frodo. `It seems weeks. You must tell me all about it,\par
if we get a chance. Something hit me, didn't it? And I fell into darkness and\par
foul dreams, and woke and found that waking was worse. Orcs were all round me.\par
I think they had just been pouring some horrible burning drink down my throat.\par
My head grew clear, but I was aching and weary. They stripped me of\par
everything; and then two great brutes came and questioned me, questioned me\par
until I thought I should go mad, standing over me, gloating, fingering their\par
knives. I'll never forget their claws and eyes.'\par
`You won't, if you talk about them, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'And if we\par
don't want to see them again, the sooner we get going the better. Can you\par
walk?'\par
`Yes, I can walk,' said Frodo, getting up slowly. 'I am not hurt Sam.\par
Only I feel very tired, and I've a pain here.' He put his hand to the back of\par
his neck above his left shoulder. He stood up, and it looked to Sam as if he\par
was clothed in flame: his naked skin was scarlet in the light of the lamp\par
above. Twice he paced across the floor.\par
`That's better!' he said, his spirits rising a little. `I didn't dare to\par
move when I was left alone, or one of the guards came. Until the yelling and\par
fighting began. The two big brutes: they quarrelled, I think. Over me and my\par
things. I lay here terrified. And then all went deadly quiet, and that was\par
worse.'\par
`Yes, they quarrelled, seemingly,' said Sam. There must have been a\par
couple of hundred of the dirty creatures in this place. A bit of a tall order\par
for Sam Gamgee, as you might say. But they've done all the killing of\par
themselves. That's lucky, but it's too long to make a song about, till we're\par
out of here. Now what's to be done? You can't go walking in the Black Land in\par
naught but your skin, Mr. Frodo.'\par
`They've taken everything, Sam,' said Frodo. `Everything I had. Do you\par
understand? _Everything!_' He cowered on the floor again with bowed head, as\par
his own words brought home to him the fullness of the disaster, and despair\par
overwhelmed him. 'The quest has failed Sam. Even if we get out of here, we\par
can't escape. Only Elves can escape. Away, away out of Middle-earth, far away\par
over the Sea. If even that is wide enough to keep the Shadow out.'\par
`No, _not_ everything, Mr. Frodo. And it hasn't failed, not yet. I took\par
it, Mr. Frodo, begging your pardon. And I've kept it safe. It's round my neck\par
now, and a terrible burden it is, too.' Sam fumbled for the Ring and its\par
chain. `But I suppose you must take it back.' Now it had come to it, Sam felt\par
reluctant to give up the Ring and burden his master with it again.\par
`You've got it?' gasped Frodo. `You've got it here? Sam, you're a\par
marvel!' Then quickly and strangely his tone changed. `Give it to me!' he\par
cried, standing up, holding out a trembling hand. `Give it me at once! You\par
can't have it!'\par
'All right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, rather startled. 'Here it is!' Slowly\par
he drew the Ring out and passed the chain over his head. `But you're in the\par
land of Mordor now, sir; and when you get out, you'll see the Fiery Mountain\par
and all. You'll find the Ring very dangerous now, and very hard to bear. If\par
it's too hard a job, I could share it with you, maybe?'\par
`No, no!' cried Frodo, snatching the Ring and chain from Sam's hands. `No\par
you won't, you thief!' He panted, staring at Sam with eyes wide with fear and\par
enmity. Then suddenly, clasping the Ring in one clenched fist, he stood\par
aghast. A mist seemed to clear from his eyes, and he passed a hand over his\par
aching brow. The hideous vision had seemed so real to him, half bemused as he\par
was still with wound and fear. Sam had changed before his very eyes into an\par
orc again, leering and pawing at his treasure, a foul little creature with\par
greedy eyes and slobbering mouth. But now the vision had passed. There was Sam\par
kneeling before him, his face wrung with pain, as if he had been stabbed in\par
the heart; tears welled from his eyes.\par
'O Sam!' cried Frodo. `What have I said? What have I done? Forgive me!\par
After all you have done. It is the horrible power of the Ring. I wish it had\par
never, never, been found. But don't mind me, Sam. I must carry the burden to\par
the end. It can't be altered. You can't come between me and this doom.'\par
'That's all right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, rubbing his sleeve across his\par
eyes. `I understand. But I can still help, can't I? I've got to get you out of\par
here. At once, see! But first you want some clothes and gear and then some\par
food. The clothes will be the easiest part. As we're in Mordor, we'd, best\par
dress up Mordor-fashion; and anyway there isn't no choice. It'll have to be\par
orc-stuff for you, Mr. Frodo, I'm afraid. And for me too. If we go together,\par
we'd best match. Now put this round you!'\par
Sam unclasped his grey cloak and cast it about Frodo's shoulders. Then\par
unslinging his pack he laid it on the floor. He drew Sting from its sheath.\par
Hardly a flicker was to be seen upon its blade. `I was forgetting this, Mr.\par
Frodo,' he said. `No, they didn't get everything! You lent me Sting, if you\par
remember, and the Lady's glass. I've got them both still. But lend them to me\par
a little longer, Mr. Frodo. I must go and see what I can find. You stay here.\par
Walk about a bit and ease your legs. I shan't be long. I shan't have to go\par
far.'\par
`Take care, Sam!' said Frodo. `And be quick! There may be orcs still\par
alive, lurking in wait.'\par
'I've got to chance it,' said Sam. He stepped to the trap-door and\par
slipped down the ladder. In a minute his head reappeared. He threw a long\par
knife on the floor.\par
`There's something that might be useful,' he said. 'He's dead: the one\par
that whipped you. Broke his neck, it seems, in his hurry. Now you draw up the\par
ladder, if you can, Mr. Frodo; and don't you let it down till you hear me call\par
the password. _Elbereth_ I'll call. What the Elves say. No orc would say\par
that.'\par
Frodo sat for a while and shivered, dreadful fears chasing one another\par
through his mind. Then he got up, drew the grey elven-cloak about him, and to\par
keep his mind occupied, began to walk to and fro, prying and peering into\par
every corner of his prison.\par
It was not very long, though fear made it seem an hour at least, before\par
he heard Sam's voice calling softly from below: _Elbereth, Elbereth_. Frodo\par
let down the light ladder. Up came Sam, puffing, heaving a great bundle on his\par
head. He let it fall with a thud.\par
`Quick now. Mr. Frodo!' he said. `I've had a bit of a search to find\par
anything small enough for the likes of us. We'll have to make do. But we must\par
hurry. I've met nothing alive, and I've seen nothing but I'm not easy. I think\par
this place is being watched. I can't explain it, but well: it feels to me as\par
if one of those foul flying Riders was about, up in the blackness where he\par
can't be seen.'\par
He opened the bundle. Frodo looked in disgust at the contents, but there\par
was nothing for it: he had to put the things on, or go naked. There were long\par
hairy breeches of some unclean beast-fell, and a tunic of dirty leather. He\par
drew them on. Over the tunic went a coat of stout ring-mail, short for a fullsized\par
orc, too long for Frodo and heavy. About it he clasped a belt, at which\par
there hung a short sheath holding a broad-bladed stabbing-sword. Sam had\par
brought several orc-helmets. One of them fitted Frodo well enough, a black cap\par
with iron rim, and iron hoops covered with leather upon which the evil Eye was\par
painted in red above the beaklike nose-guard.\par
`The Morgul-stuff, Gorbag's gear, was a better fit and better made,' said\par
Sam; `but it wouldn't do, I guess, to go carrying his tokens into Mordor, not\par
after this business here. Well, there you are, Mr. Frodo. A perfect little\par
orc, if I may make so bold-at least you would be, if we could cover your face\par
with a mask, give you longer arms, and make you bow-legged. This will hide\par
some of the tell-tales.' He put a large black cloak round Frodo's shoulders.\par
`Now you're ready! You can pick up a shield as we go.'\par
'What about you, Sam?' said Frodo. `Aren't we going to match?'\par
`Well, Mr. Frodo, I've been thinking,' said Sam. 'I'd best not leave any\par
of my stuff behind, and we can't destroy it. And I can't wear orc-mail over\par
all my clothes, can I? I'll just have to cover up.'\par
He knelt down and carefully folded his elven-cloak. It went into a\par
surprisingly small roll. This he put into his pack that lay on the floor.\par
Standing up, he slung it behind his back, put an orc-helm on his head, and\par
cast another black cloak about his shoulders. `There!' he said. `Now we match,\par
near enough. And now we must be off!'\par
'I can't go all the way at a run, Sam,' said Frodo with a wry smile. 'I\par
hope you've made inquiries about inns along the road? Or have you forgotten\par
about food and drink?'\par
`Save me, but so I had!' said Sam. He whistled in dismay. 'Bless me, Mr.\par
Frodo, but you've gone and made me that hungry and thirsty! I don't know when\par
drop or morsel last passed my lips. I'd forgotten it, trying to find you. But\par
let me think! Last time I looked I'd got about enough of that waybread, and of\par
what Captain Faramir gave us, to keep me on my legs for a couple of weeks at a\par
pinch. But if there's a drop left in my bottle, there's no more. That's not\par
going to be enough for two, nohow. Don't ores eat, and don't they drink? Or do\par
they just live on foul air and poison?'\par
`No, they eat and drink, Sam. The Shadow that bred them can only mock, it\par
cannot make: not real new things of its own. I don't think it gave life to the\par
ores, it only ruined them and twisted them; and if they are to live at all,\par
they have to live like other living creatures. Foul waters and foul meats\par
they'll take, if they can get no better, but not poison. They've fed me, and\par
so I'm better off than you. There must be food and water somewhere in this\par
place.' `But there's no time to look for them,' said Sam.\par
`Well, things are a bit better than you think,' said Frodo. 'I have had a\par
bit of luck while you were away. Indeed they did not take everything. I've\par
found my food-bag among some rags on the floor. They've rummaged it, of\par
course. But I guess they disliked the very look and smell of the _lembas_,\par
worse than Gollum did. It's scattered about and some of it is trampled and\par
broken, but I've gathered it together. It's not far short of what you've got.\par
But they've taken Faramir's food, and they've slashed up my water-bottle.'\par
`Well, there's no more to be said,' said Sam. `We've got enough to start\par
on. But the water's going to be a bad business. But come Mr. Frodo! Off we go,\par
or a whole lake of it won't do us any good!'\par
'Not till you've had a mouthful, Sam,' said Frodo. `I won't budge. Here,\par
take this elven-cake, and drink that last drop in your bottle! The whole thing\par
is quite hopeless, so it's no good worrying about tomorrow. It probably won't\par
come.'\par
At last they started. Down the ladder they climbed, and then Sam took it\par
and laid it in the passage beside the huddled body of the fallen orc. The\par
stair was dark, but on the roof-top the glare of the Mountain could still be\par
seen, though it was dying down now to a sullen red. They picked up two shields\par
to complete their disguise and then went on.\par
Down the great stairway they plodded. The high chamber of the turret\par
behind, where they had met again, seemed almost homely: they were out in the\par
open again now, and terror ran along the walls. All might be dead in the Tower\par
of Cirith Ungol, but it was steeped in fear and evil still.\par
At length they came to the door upon the outer court, and they halted.\par
Even from where they stood they felt the malice of the Watchers beating on\par
them, black silent shapes on either side of the gate through which the glare\par
of Mordor dimly showed. As they threaded their way among the hideous bodies of\par
the ores each step became more difficult. Before they even reached the archway\par
they were brought to a stand. To move an inch further was a pain and weariness\par
to will and limb.\par
Frodo had no strength for such a battle. He sank to the ground. `I can't\par
go on, Sam,' he murmured. `I'm going to faint. I don't know what's come over\par
me.'\par
`I do, Mr. Frodo. Hold up now! It's the gate. There's some devilry there.\par
But I got through, and I'm going to get out. It can't be more dangerous than\par
before. Now for it!'\par
Sam drew out the elven-glass of Galadriel again. As if to do honour to\par
his hardihood, and to grace with splendour his faithful brown hobbit-hand that\par
had done such deeds, the phial blazed forth suddenly, so that all the shadowy\par
court was lit with a dazzling radiance like lightning; but it remained steady\par
and did not pass.\par
'_Gilthoniel, A Elbereth!_' Sam cried. For, why he did not know, his\par
thought sprang back suddenly to the Elves in the Shire, and the song that\par
drove away the Black Rider in the trees.\par
'_Aiya elenion ancalima!_' cried Frodo once again behind him.\par
The will of the Watchers was broken with a suddenness like the snapping\par
of a cord, and Frodo and Sam stumbled forward. Then they ran. Through the gate\par
and past the great seated figures with their glittering eyes. There was a\par
crack. The keystone of the arch crashed almost on their heels, and the wall\par
above crumbled, and fell in ruin. Only by a hair did they escape. A bell\par
clanged; and from the Watchers there went up a high and dreadful wail. Far up\par
above in the darkness it was answered. Out of the black sky there came\par
dropping like a bolt a winged shape, rending the clouds with a ghastly shriek.\par
_Chapter 2_\par
The Land of Shadow\par
Sam had just wits enough left to thrust the phial back into his breast.\par
'Run, Mr. Frodo!' he cried. 'No, not that way! There's a sheer drop over the\par
wall. Follow me!'\par
Down the road from the gate they fled. In fifty paces, with a swift bend\par
round a jutting bastion of the cliff, it took them out of sight from the\par
Tower. They had escaped for the moment. Cowering back against the rock they\par
drew breath, and then they clutched at their hearts. Perching now on the wall\par
beside the ruined gate the Nazg\'fbl sent out its deadly cries. All the cliffs\par
echoed.\par
In terror they stumbled on. Soon the road bent sharply eastward again and\par
exposed them for a dreadful moment to view from the Tower. As they flitted\par
across they glanced back and saw the great black shape upon the battlement;\par
then they plunged down between high rock-walls in a cutting that fell steeply\par
to join the Morgul-road. They came to the way-meeting. There was still no sign\par
of orcs, nor of an answer to the cry of the Nazg\'fbl; but they knew that the\par
silence would not last long. At any moment now the hunt would begin.\par
'This won't do, Sam,' said Frodo. 'If we were real orcs, we ought to be\par
dashing back to the Tower, not running away. The first enemy we meet will know\par
us. We must get off this road somehow.'\par
'But we can't,' said Sam, 'not without wings.'\par
The eastern faces of the Ephel D\'faath were sheer, falling in cliff and\par
precipice to the black trough that lay between them and the inner ridge. A\par
short way beyond the way-meeting, after another steep incline, a flying bridge\par
of stone leapt over the chasm and bore the road across into the tumbled slopes\par
and glens of the Morgai. With a desperate spurt Frodo and Sam dashed along the\par
bridge; but they had hardly reached its further end when they heard the hue\par
and cry begin. Away behind them, now high above on the mountain-side, loomed\par
the Tower of Cirith Ungol, its stones glowing dully. Suddenly its harsh bell\par
clanged again, and then broke into a shattering peal. Horns sounded. And now\par
from beyond the bridge-end came answering cries. Down in the dark trough, cut\par
off from the dying glare of Orodruin, Frodo and Sam could not see ahead, but\par
already they heard the tramp of iron-shod feet, and upon the road there rang\par
the swift clatter of hoofs.\par
'Quick, Sam! Over we go!' cried Frodo. They scrambled on to the low\par
parapet of the bridge. Fortunately there was no longer any dreadful drop into\par
the gulf, for the slopes of the Morgai had already risen almost to the level\par
of the road; but it was too dark for them to guess the depth of the fall.\par
'Well, here goes, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'Good-bye!'\par
He let go. Frodo followed. And even as they fell they heard the rush of\par
horsemen sweeping over the bridge and the rattle of orc-feet running up\par
behind. But Sam would have laughed, if he had dared. Half fearing a breaking\par
plunge down on to unseen rocks the hobbits landed, in a drop of no more than a\par
dozen feet, with a thud and a crunch into the last thing that they had\par
expected: a tangle of thorny bushes. There Sam lay still, softly sucking a\par
scratched hand.\par
When the sound of hoof and foot had passed he ventured a whisper. 'Bless\par
me, Mr. Frodo, but I didn't know as anything grew in Mordor! But if I had\par
a'known, this is just what I'd have looked for. These thorns must be a foot\par
long by the feel of them; they've stuck through everything I've got on. Wish\par
I'd a'put that mail-shirt on!'\par
'Orc-mail doesn't keep these thorns out,' said Frodo. 'Not even a leather\par
jerkin is any good.'\par
They had a struggle to get out of the thicket. The thorns and briars were\par
as tough as wire and as clinging as claws. Their cloaks were rent and tattered\par
before they broke free at last.\par
'Now down we go, Sam,' Frodo whispered. 'Down into the valley quick, and\par
then turn northward, as soon as ever we can.'\par
Day was coming again in the world outside, and far beyond the glooms of\par
Mordor the Sun was climbing over the eastern rim of Middle-earth; but here all\par
was still dark as night. The Mountain smouldered and its fires went out. The\par
glare faded from the cliffs. The easterly wind that had been blowing ever\par
since they left Ithilien now seemed dead. Slowly and painfully they clambered\par
down, groping, stumbling, scrambling among rock and briar and dead wood in the\par
blind shadows, down and down until they could go no further.\par
At length they stopped, and sat side by side, their backs against a\par
boulder. Both were sweating. 'If Shagrat himself was to offer me a glass of\par
water, I'd shake his hand,' said Sam.\par
'Don't say such things!' said Frodo. 'It only makes it worse.' Then he\par
stretched himself out, dizzy and weary, and he spoke no more for a while. At\par
last with a struggle he got up again. To his amazement he found that Sam was\par
asleep. 'Wake up, Sam!' he said. 'Come on! It's time we made another effort.'\par
Sam scrambled to his feet. 'Well I never!' he said. 'I must have dropped\par
off. It's a long time, Mr. Frodo, since I had a proper sleep, and my eyes just\par
closed down on their own.'\par
Frodo now led the way, northward as near as he could guess, among the\par
stones and boulders lying thick at the bottom of the great ravine. But\par
presently he stopped again.\par
'It's no good, Sam,' he said. 'I can't manage it. This mail-shirt, I\par
mean. Not in my present state. Even my mithril-coat seemed heavy when I was\par
tired. This is far heavier. And what's the use of it? We shan't win through by\par
fighting.'\par
'But we may have some to do,' said Sam. 'And there's knives and stray\par
arrows. That Gollum isn't dead, for one thing. I don't like to think of you\par
with naught but a bit of leather between you and a stab in the dark.'\par
'Look here, Sam dear lad,' said Frodo: 'I am tired, weary, I haven't a\par
hope left. But I have to go on trying to get to the Mountain, as long as I can\par
move. The Ring is enough. This extra weight is killing me. It must go. But\par
don't think I'm ungrateful. I hate to think of the foul work you must have had\par
among the bodies to find it for me.'\par
'Don't talk about it, Mr. Frodo. Bless you! I'd carry you on my back, if\par
I could. Let it go then!'\par
Frodo laid aside his cloak and took off the orc-mail and flung it away.\par
He shivered a little. 'What I really need is something warm,' he said. 'It's\par
gone cold, or else I've caught a chill.'\par
'You can have my cloak, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. He unslung his pack and\par
took out the elven-cloak. 'How's this, Mr. Frodo?' he said. 'You wrap that\par
orc-rag close round you, and put the belt outside it. Then this can go over\par
all. It don't look quite orc-fashion, but it'll keep you warmer; and I daresay\par
it'll keep you from harm better than any other gear. It was made by the Lady.'\par
Frodo took the cloak and fastened the brooch. 'That's better!' he said.\par
'I feel much lighter. I can go on now. But this blind dark seems to be getting\par
into my heart. As I lay in prison, Sam. I tried to remember the Brandywine,\par
and Woody End, and The Water running through the mill at Hobbiton. But I can't\par
see them now.'\par
'There now, Mr. Frodo, it's you that's talking of water this time!' said\par
Sam. 'If only the Lady could see us or hear us, I'd say to her: Your Ladyship,\par
all we want is light and water: just clean water and plain daylight, better\par
than any jewels, begging your pardon. But it's a long way to L\'f3rien.' Sam\par
sighed and waved his hand towards the heights of the Ephel D\'faath, now only to\par
be guessed as a deeper blackness against the black sky.\par
They started off again. They had not gone far when Frodo paused. 'There's\par
a Black Rider over us,' he said. 'I can feel it. We had better keep still for\par
a while.'\par
Crouched under a great boulder they sat facing back westward and did not\par
speak for some time. Then Frodo breathed a sigh of relief. 'It's passed,' he\par
said. They stood up, and then they both stared in wonder. Away to their left,\par
southward, against a sky that was turning grey, the peaks and high ridges of\par
the great range began to appear dark and black, visible shapes. Light was\par
growing behind them. Slowly it crept towards the North. There was battle far\par
above in the high spaces of the air. The billowing clouds of Mordor were being\par
driven back, their edges tattering as a wind out of the living world came up\par
and swept the fumes and smokes towards the dark land of their home. Under the\par
lifting skirts of the dreary canopy dim light leaked into Mordor like pale\par
morning through the grimed window of a prison.\par
'Look at it, Mr. Frodo!' said Sam. 'Look at it! The wind's changed.\par
Something's happening. He's not having it all his own way. His darkness is\par
breaking up out in the world there. I wish I could see what is going on!'\par
It was the morning of the fifteenth of March, and over the Vale of Anduin\par
the Sun was rising above the eastern shadow, and the south-west wind was\par
blowing. Th\'e9oden lay dying on the Pelennor Fields.\par
As Frodo and Sam stood and gazed, the rim of light spread all along the\par
line of the Ephel D\'faath, and then they saw a shape, moving at a great speed\par
out of the West, at first only a black speck against the glimmering strip\par
above the mountain-tops, but growing, until it plunged like a bolt into the\par
dark canopy and passed high above them. As it went it sent out a long shrill\par
cry, the voice of a Nazg\'fbl; but this cry no longer held any terror for them:\par
it was a cry of woe and dismay, ill tidings for the Dark Tower. The Lord of\par
the Ring-wraiths had met his doom.\par
'What did I tell you? Something's happening!' cried Sam.' The war's going\par
well, said Shagrat; but Gorbag he wasn't so sure. And he was right there too.\par
Things are looking up, Mr. Frodo. Haven't you got some hope now?'\par
'Well no, not much, Sam,' Frodo sighed. 'That's away beyond the\par
mountains. We're going east not west. And I'm so tired. And the Ring is so\par
heavy, Sam. And I begin to see it in my mind all the time, like a great wheel\par
of fire.'\par
Sam's quick spirits sank again at once. He looked at his master\par
anxiously, and he took his hand. 'Come, Mr. Frodo!' he said. 'I've got one\par
thing I wanted: a bit of light. Enough to help us, and yet I guess it's\par
dangerous too. Try a bit further, and then we'll lie close and have a rest.\par
But take a morsel to eat now, a bit of the Elves' food; it may hearten you.'\par
Sharing a wafer of _lembas_, and munching it as best they could with\par
their parched mouths. Frodo and Sam plodded on. The light, though no more than\par
a grey dusk, was now enough for them to see that they were deep in the valley\par
between the mountains. It sloped up gently northward, and at its bottom went\par
the bed of a now dry and withered stream. Beyond its stony course they saw a\par
beaten path that wound its way under the feet of the westward cliffs. Had they\par
known, they could have reached it quicker, for it was a track that left the\par
main Morgul-road at the western bridge-end and went down by a long stair cut\par
in the rock to the valley's bottom. It was used by patrols or by messengers\par
going swiftly to lesser posts and strongholds north-away, between Cirith Ungol\par
and the narrows of Isenmouthe, the iron jaws of Carach Angren.\par
It was perilous for the hobbits to use such a path, but they needed\par
speed, and Frodo felt that he could not face the toil of scrambling among the\par
boulders or in the trackless glens of the Morgai. And he judged that northward\par
was, maybe, the way that their hunters would least expect them to take. The\par
road east to the plain, or the pass back westward, those they would first\par
search most thoroughly. Only when he was well north of the Tower did he mean\par
to turn and seek for some way to take him east, east on the last desperate\par
stage of his journey. So now they crossed the stony bed and took to the orcpath,\par
and for some time they marched along it. The cliffs at their left were\par
overhung, and they could not be seen from above; but the path made many bends,\par
and at each bend they gripped their sword-hilts and went forward cautiously.\par
The light grew no stronger, for Orodruin was still belching forth a great\par
fume that, beaten upwards by the opposing airs, mounted higher and higher,\par
until it reached a region above the wind and spread in an immeasurable roof,\par
whose central pillar rose out of the shadows beyond their view. They had\par
trudged for more than an hour when they heard a sound that brought them to a\par
halt. Unbelievable, but unmistakable. Water trickling. Out of a gully on the\par
left, so sharp and narrow that it looked as if the black cliff had been cloven\par
by some huge axe, water came dripping down: the last remains, maybe, of some\par
sweet rain gathered from sunlit seas, but ill-fated to fall at last upon the\par
walls of the Black Land and wander fruitless down into the dust. Here it came\par
out of the rock in a little falling streamlet, and flowed across the path, and\par
turning south ran away swiftly to be lost among the dead stones.\par
Sam sprang towards it. 'If ever I see the Lady again, I will tell her!'\par
he cried. 'Light and now water!' Then he stopped. 'Let me drink first Mr.\par
Frodo,' he said.\par
'All right, but there's room enough for two.'\par
'I didn't mean that,' said Sam. 'I mean: if it's poisonous, or something\par
that will show its badness quick, well, better me than you, master, if you\par
understand me.'\par
'I do. But I think we'll trust our luck together, Sam; or our blessing.\par
Still, be careful now, if it's very cold!'\par
The water was cool but not icy, and it had an unpleasant taste, at once\par
bitter and oily, or so they would have said at home. Here it seemed beyond all\par
praise, and beyond fear or prudence. They drank their fill, and Sam\par
replenished his water-bottle. After that Frodo felt easier, and they went on\par
for several miles, until the broadening of the road and the beginnings of a\par
rough wall along its edge warned them that they were drawing near to another\par
orc-hold.\par
'This is where we turn aside, Sam,' said Frodo. 'And we must turn east.'\par
He sighed as he looked at the gloomy ridges across the valley. 'I have just\par
about enough strength left to find some hole away up there. And then I must\par
rest a little.'\par
The river-bed was now some way below the path. They scrambled down to it,\par
and began to cross it. To their surprise they came upon dark pools fed by\par
threads of water trickling down from some source higher up the valley. Upon\par
its outer marges under the westward mountains Mordor was a dying land, but it\par
was not yet dead. And here things still grew, harsh, twisted, bitter,\par
struggling for life. In the glens of the Morgai on the other side of the\par
valley low scrubby trees lurked and clung, coarse grey grass-tussocks fought\par
with the stones, and withered mosses crawled on them; and everywhere great\par
writhing, tangled brambles sprawled. Some had long stabbing thorns, some\par
hooked barbs that rent like knives. The sullen shrivelled leaves of a past\par
year hung on them, grating and rattling in the sad airs, but their maggotridden\par
buds were only just opening. Flies, dun or grey, or black, marked like\par
ores with a red eye-shaped blotch, buzzed and stung; and above the briarthickets\par
clouds of hungry midges danced and reeled.\par
'Orc-gear's no good,' said Sam, waving his arms. 'I wish I'd got an orc's\par
hide!'\par
At last Frodo could go no further. They had climbed up a narrow shelving\par
ravine, but they still had a long way to go before they could even come in\par
sight of the last craggy ridge. 'I must rest now, Sam, and sleep if I can.'\par
said Frodo. He looked about, but there seemed nowhere even for an animal to\par
crawl into in this dismal country. At length, tired out, they slunk under a\par
curtain of brambles that hung down like a mat over a low rock-face.\par
There they sat and made such a meal as they could. Keeping back the\par
precious _lembas_ for the evil days ahead, they ate the half of what remained\par
in Sam's bag of Faramir's provision: some dried fruit, and a small slip of\par
cured meat; and they sipped some water. They had drunk again from the pools in\par
the valley, but they were very, thirsty again. There was a bitter tang in the\par
air of Mordor that dried the mouth. When Sam thought of water even his hopeful\par
spirit quailed. Beyond the Morgai there was the dreadful plain of Gorgoroth to\par
cross.\par
'Now you go to sleep first, Mr. Frodo,' he said. 'It's getting dark\par
again. I reckon this day is nearly over.'\par
Frodo sighed and was asleep almost before the words were spoken. Sam\par
struggled with his own weariness, and he took Frodo's hand; and there he sat\par
silent till deep night fell. Then at last, to keep himself awake, he crawled\par
from the hiding-place and looked out. The land seemed full of creaking and\par
cracking and sly noises, but there was no sound of voice or of foot. Far above\par
the Ephel D\'faath in the West the night-sky was still dim and pale. There,\par
peeping among the cloud-wrack above a dark tor high up in the mountains, Sam\par
saw a white star twinkle for a while. The beauty of it smote his heart, as he\par
looked up out of the forsaken land, and hope returned to him. For like a\par
shaft, clear and cold, the thought pierced him that in the end the Shadow was\par
only a small and passing thing: there was light and high beauty for ever\par
beyond its reach. His song in the Tower had been defiance rather than hope;\par
for then he was thinking of himself. Now, for a moment, his own fate, and even\par
his masters, ceased to trouble him. He crawled back into the brambles and laid\par
himself by Frodo's side, and putting away all fear he cast himself into a deep\par
untroubled sleep.\par
They woke together, hand in hand. Sam was almost fresh, ready for another\par
day; but Frodo sighed. His sleep had been uneasy, full of dreams of fire, and\par
waking brought him no comfort. Still his sleep had not been without all\par
healing virtue: he was stronger, more able to bear his burden one stage\par
further. They did not know the time, nor how long they had slept; but after a\par
morsel of food and a sip of water they went on up the ravine, until it ended\par
in a sharp slope of screes and sliding stones. There the last living things\par
gave up their struggle; the tops of the Morgai were grassless, bare, jagged,\par
barren as a slate.\par
After much wandering and search they found a way that they could climb,\par
and with a last hundred feet of clawing scramble they were up. They came to a\par
cleft between two dark crags, and passing through found themselves on the very\par
edge of the last fence of Mordor. Below them, at the bottom of a fall of some\par
fifteen hundred feet, lay the inner plain stretching away into a formless\par
gloom beyond their sight. The wind of the world blew now from the West, and\par
the great clouds were lifted high, floating away eastward; but still only a\par
grey light came to the dreary fields of Gorgoroth. There smokes trailed on the\par
ground and lurked in hollows, and fumes leaked from fissures in the earth.\par
Still far away, forty miles at least, they saw Mount Doom, its feet\par
founded in ashen ruin, its huge cone rising to a great height, where its\par
reeking head was swathed in cloud. Its fires were now dimmed, and it stood in\par
smouldering slumber, as threatening and dangerous as a sleeping beast. Behind\par
it there hung a vast shadow, ominous as a thunder-cloud, the veils of Baradd\'fbr\par
that was reared far way upon a long spur of the Ashen Mountains thrust\par
down from the North. The Dark Power was deep in thought, and the Eye turned\par
inward, pondering tidings of doubt and danger: a bright sword, and a stern and\par
kingly face it saw, and for a while it gave little thought to other things;\par
and all its great stronghold, gate on gate, and tower on tower, was wrapped in\par
a brooding gloom.\par
Frodo and Sam gazed out in mingled loathing and wonder on this hateful\par
land. Between them and the smoking mountain, and about it north and south, all\par
seemed ruinous and dead, a desert burned and choked. They wondered how the\par
Lord of this realm maintained and fed his slaves and his armies. Yet armies he\par
had. As far as their eyes could reach, along the skirts of the Morgai and away\par
southward, there were camps, some of tents, some ordered like small towns. One\par
of the largest of these was right below them. Barely a mile out into the plain\par
it clustered like some huge nest of insects, with straight dreary streets of\par
huts and long low drab buildings. About it the ground was busy with folk going\par
to and fro; a wide road ran from it south-east to join the Morgul-way, and\par
along it many lines of small black shapes were hurrying.\par
'I don't like the look of things at all,' said Sam. 'Pretty hopeless, I\par
call it \endash  saving that where there's such a lot of folk there must be wells or\par
water, not to mention food. And these are Men not Orcs, or my eyes are all\par
wrong.'\par
Neither he nor Frodo knew anything of the great slave-worked fields away\par
south in this wide realm, beyond the fumes of the Mountain by the dark sad\par
waters of Lake N\'farnen; nor of the great roads that ran away east and south to\par
tributary lands, from which the soldiers of the Tower brought long waggontrains\par
of goods and booty and fresh slaves. Here in the northward regions were\par
the mines and forges, and the musterings of long-planned war; and here the\par
Dark Power, moving its armies like pieces on the board, was gathering them\par
together. Its first moves, the first feelers of its strength, had been checked\par
upon its western line, southward and northward. For the moment it withdrew\par
them, and brought up new forces, massing them about Cirith Gorgor for an\par
avenging stroke. And if it had also been its purpose to defend the Mountain\par
against all approach, it could scarcely have done more.\par
'Well!' Sam went on. 'Whatever they have to eat and drink, we can't get\par
it. There's no way down that I can see. And we couldn't cross all that open\par
country crawling with enemies, even if we did get down.'\par
'Still we shall have to try,' said Frodo. 'It's no worse than I expected.\par
I never hoped to get across. I can't see any hope of it now. But I've still\par
got to do the best I can. At present that is to avoid being captured as long\par
as possible. So we must still go northwards, I think, and see what it is like\par
where the open plain is narrower.'\par
'I guess what it'll be like,' said Sam. 'Where it's narrower the Orcs and\par
Men will just be packed closer. You'll see, Mr. Frodo.'\par
'I dare say I shall, if we ever get so far,' said Frodo and turned away.\par
They soon found that it was impossible to make their way along the crest\par
of the Morgai, or anywhere along its higher levels, pathless as they were and\par
scored with deep ghylls. In the end they were forced to go back down the\par
ravine that they had climbed and seek for a way along the valley. It was rough\par
going, for they dared not cross over to the path on the westward side. After a\par
mile or more they saw, huddled in a hollow at the cliff's foot, the orc-hold\par
that they had guessed was near at hand: a wall and a cluster of stone huts set\par
about the dark mouth of a cave. There was no movement to be seen, but the\par
hobbits crept by cautiously, keeping as much as they could to the thorn-brakes\par
that grew thickly at this point along both sides of the old water-course.\par
They went two or three miles further, and the orc-hold was hidden from\par
sight behind them; but they had hardly begun to breathe more freely again when\par
harsh and loud they heard orc-voices. Quickly they slunk out of sight behind a\par
brown and stunted bush. The voices drew nearer. Presently two orcs came into\par
view. One was clad in ragged brown and was armed with a bow of horn; it was of\par
a small breed, black-skinned, with wide and snuffling nostrils: evidently a\par
tracker of some kind. The other was a big fighting-orc, like those of\par
Shagrat's company, bearing the token of the Eye. He also had a bow at his back\par
and carried a short broad-headed spear. As usual they were quarrelling, and\par
being of different breeds they used the Common Speech after their fashion.\par
Hardly twenty paces from where the hobbits lurked the small orc stopped.\par
'Nar!' it snarled. 'I'm going home.' It pointed across the valley to the orchold.\par
'No good wearing my nose out on stones any more. There's not a trace\par
left, I say. I've lost the scent through giving way to you. It went up into\par
the hills, not along the valley, I tell you.'\par
'Not much use are you, you little snufflers?' said the big orc. 'I reckon\par
eyes are better than your snotty noses.'\par
'Then what have you seen with them?' snarled the other. 'Garn! You don't\par
even know what you're looking for.'\par
'Whose blame's that?' said the soldier. 'Not mine. That comes from Higher\par
Up. First they say it's a great Elf in bright armour, then it's a sort of\par
small dwarf-man, then it must be a pack of rebel Uruk-hai; or maybe it's all\par
the lot together.'\par
'Ar!' said the tracker. 'They've lost their heads, that's what it is. And\par
some of the bosses are going to lose their skins too, I guess, if what I hear\par
is true: Tower raided and all, and hundreds of your lads done in, and prisoner\par
got away. If that's the way you fighters go on, small wonder there's bad news\par
from the battles.'\par
'Who says there's bad news?' shouted the soldier.\par
'Ar! Who says there isn't?'\par
'That's cursed rebel-talk, and I'll stick you, if you don't shut it down,\par
see?'\par
'All right, all right!' said the tracker. 'I'll say no more and go on\par
thinking. But what's the black sneak got to do with it all? That gobbler with\par
the flapping hands?'\par
'I don't know. Nothing, maybe. But he's up to no good, nosing around,\par
I'll wager. Curse him! No sooner had he slipped us and run off than word came\par
he's wanted alive, wanted quick.'\par
'Well, I hope they get him and put him through it,' growled the tracker.\par
'He messed up the scent back there, pinching that cast-off mail-shirt that he\par
found, and paddling all round the place before I could get there.'\par
'It saved his life anyhow,' said the soldier. 'Why, before I knew he was\par
wanted I shot him, as neat as neat, at fifty paces right in the back; but he\par
ran on.'\par
'Garn! You missed him,' said the tracker. 'First you shoot wild, then you\par
run too slow, and then you send for the poor trackers. I've had enough of\par
you.' He loped off.\par
'You come back,' shouted the soldier, 'or I'll report you!'\par
'Who to? Not to your precious Shagrat. He won't be captain any more.'\par
'I'll give your name and number to the Nazg\'fbl,' said the soldier lowering\par
his voice to a hiss. 'One of _them_'s in charge at the Tower now.'\par
The other halted, and his voice was full of fear and rage. 'You cursed\par
peaching sneakthief!' he yelled. 'You can't do your job, and you can't even\par
stick by your own folk. Go to your filthy Shriekers, and may they freeze the\par
flesh off you! If the enemy doesn't get them first. They've done in Number\par
One, I've heard, and I hope it's true!'\par
The big orc, spear in hand, leapt after him. But the tracker, springing\par
behind a stone, put an arrow in his eye as he ran up, and he fell with a\par
crash. The other ran off across the valley and disappeared.\par
For a while the hobbits sat in silence. At length Sam stirred. 'Well I\par
call that neat as neat,' he said. 'If this nice friendliness would spread\par
about in Mordor, half our trouble would be over.'\par
'Quietly, Sam,' Frodo whispered. 'There may be others about. We have\par
evidently had a very narrow escape, and the hunt was hotter on our tracks than\par
we guessed. But that is the spirit of Mordor, Sam; and it has spread to every\par
corner of it. Orcs have always behaved like that, or so all tales say, when\par
they are on their own. But you can't get much hope out of it. They hate us far\par
more, altogether and all the time. If those two had seen us, they would have\par
dropped all their quarrel until we were dead.'\par
There was another long silence. Sam broke it again, but with a whisper\par
this time. 'Did you hear what they said about _that gobbler_, Mr. Frodo? I\par
told you Gollum wasn't dead yet, didn't I?'\par
'Yes, I remember. And I wondered how you knew,' said Frodo. 'Well come\par
now! I think we had better not move out from here again, until it has gone\par
quite dark. So you shall tell me how you know, and all about what happened. If\par
you can do it quietly.'\par
'I'll try,' said Sam, 'but when I think of that Stinker I get so hot I\par
could shout.'\par
There the hobbits sat under the cover of the thorny bush, while the drear\par
light of Mordor faded slowly into a deep and starless night; and Sam spoke\par
into Frodo's ear all that he could find words for of Gollum's treacherous\par
attack, the horror of Shelob, and his own adventures with the orcs. When he\par
had finished, Frodo said nothing but took Sam's hand and pressed it. At length\par
he stirred.\par
'Well, I suppose we must be going on again,' he said. 'I wonder how long\par
it will be before we really are caught and all the toiling and the slinking\par
will be over, and in vain.' He stood up. 'It's dark, and we cannot use the\par
Lady's glass. Keep it safe for me, Sam. I have nowhere to keep it now, except\par
in my hand, and I shall need both hands in the blind night. But Sting I give\par
to you. I have got an orc-blade, but I do not think it will be my part to\par
strike any blow again.'\par
It was difficult and dangerous moving in the night in the pathless land;\par
but slowly and with much stumbling the two hobbits toiled on hour by hour\par
northward along the eastern edge of the stony valley. When a grey light crept\par
back over the western heights, long after day had opened in the lands beyond,\par
they went into hiding again and slept a little, turn by turn. In his times of\par
waking Sam was busy with thoughts of food. At last when Frodo roused himself\par
and spoke of eating and making ready for yet another effort, he asked the\par
question that was troubling him most.\par
'Begging your pardon, Mr. Frodo,' he said, 'but have you any notion how\par
far there is still to go?'\par
'No, not any clear notion, Sam,' Frodo answered. 'In Rivendell before I\par
set out I was shown a map of Mordor that was made before the Enemy came back\par
here; but I only remember it vaguely. I remember clearest that there was a\par
place in the north where the western range and the northern range send out\par
spurs that nearly meet. That must be twenty leagues at least from the bridge\par
back by the Tower. It might be a good point at which to cross. But of course,\par
if we get there, we shall be further than we were from the Mountain, sixty\par
miles from it, I should think. I guess that we have gone about twelve leagues\par
north from the bridge now. Even if all goes well, I could hardly reach the\par
Mountain in a week. I am afraid, Sam, that the burden will get very heavy, and\par
I shall go still slower as we get nearer.'\par
Sam sighed. 'That's just as I feared,' he said. 'Well, to say nothing of\par
water, we've got to eat less, Mr. Frodo, or else move a bit quicker, at any\par
rate while we're still in this valley. One more bite and all the food's ended,\par
save the Elves' waybread.'\par
'I'll try and be a bit quicker, Sam,' said Frodo, drawing a deep breath.\par
'Come on then! Let's start another march!'\par
It was not yet quite dark again. They plodded along, on into the night.\par
The hours passed in a weary stumbling trudge with a few brief halts. At the\par
first hint of grey light under the skirts of the canopy of shadow they hid\par
themselves again in a dark hollow under an overhanging stone.\par
Slowly the light grew, until it was clearer than it yet had been. A\par
strong wind from the West was now driving the fumes of Mordor from the upper\par
airs. Before long the hobbits could make out the shape of the land for some\par
miles about them. The trough between the mountains and the Morgai had steadily\par
dwindled as it climbed upwards, and the inner ridge was now no more than a\par
shelf in the steep faces of the Ephel D\'faath; but to the east it fell as\par
sheerly as ever down into Gorgoroth. Ahead the water-course came to an end in\par
broken steps of rock; for out from the main range there sprang a high barren\par
spur, thrusting eastward like a wall. To meet it there stretched out from the\par
grey and misty northern range of Ered Lithui a long jutting arm; and between\par
the ends there was a narrow gap: Carach Angren, the Isenmouthe, beyond which\par
lay the deep dale of Ud\'fbn. In that dale behind the Morannon were the tunnels\par
and deep armouries that the servants of Mordor had made for the defence of the\par
Black Gate of their land; and there now their Lord was gathering in haste\par
great forces to meet the onslaught of the Captains of the West. Upon the outthrust\par
spurs forts and towers were built, and watch-fires burned; and all\par
across the gap an earth-wall had been raised, and a deep trench delved that\par
could be crossed only by a single bridge.\par
A few miles north, high up in the angle where the western spur branched\par
away from the main range, stood the old castle of Durthang, now one of the\par
many orc-holds that clustered about the dale of Ud\'fbn. A road, already visible\par
in the growing light, came winding down from it, until only a mile or two from\par
where the hobbits lay it turned east and ran along a shelf cut in the side of\par
the spur, and so went down into the plain, and on to the Isenmouthe.\par
To the hobbits as they looked out it seemed that all their journey north\par
had been useless. The plain to their right was dim and smoky, and they could\par
see there neither camps nor troops moving; but all that region was under the\par
vigilance of the forts of Carach Angren.\par
'We have come to a dead end, Sam,' said Frodo. 'If we go on, we shall\par
only come up to that orc-tower, but the only road to take is that road that\par
comes down from it \endash  unless we go back. We can't climb up westward, or climb\par
down eastward.'\par
'Then we must take the road, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'We must take it and\par
chance our luck, if there is any luck in Mordor. We might as well give\par
ourselves up as wander about any more, or try to go back. Our food won't last.\par
We've got to make a dash for it!'\par
'All right, Sam,' said Frodo. 'Lead me! As long as you've got any hope\par
left. Mine is gone. But I can't dash, Sam. I'll just plod along after you.'\par
'Before you start any more plodding, you need sleep and food, Mr. Frodo.\par
Come and take what you can get of them!'\par
He gave Frodo water and an additional wafer of the waybread, and he made\par
a pillow of his cloak for his master's head. Frodo was too weary to debate the\par
matter, and Sam did not tell him that he had drunk the last drop of their\par
water, and eaten Sam's share of the food as well as his own. When Frodo was\par
asleep Sam bent over him and listened to his breathing and scanned his face.\par
It was lined and thin, and yet in sleep it looked content and unafraid. 'Well,\par
here goes, Master!' Sam muttered to himself. 'I'll have to leave you for a bit\par
and trust to luck. Water we must have, or we'll get no further.'\par
Sam crept out, and flitting from stone to stone with more than hobbitcare,\par
he went down to the water-course, and then followed it for some way as\par
it climbed north, until he came to the rock-steps where long ago, no doubt,\par
its spring had come gushing down in a little waterfall. All now seemed dry and\par
silent; but refusing to despair Sam stooped and listened, and to his delight\par
he caught the sound of trickling. Clambering a few steps up he found a tiny\par
stream of dark water that came out from the hill-side and filled a little bare\par
pool, from which again it spilled, and vanished then under the barren stones.\par
Sam tasted the water, and it seemed good enough. Then he drank deeply,\par
refilled the bottle, and turned to go back. At that moment he caught a glimpse\par
of a black form or shadow flitting among the rocks away near Frodo's hidingplace.\par
Biting back a cry, he leapt down from the spring and ran, jumping from\par
stone to stone. It was a wary creature, difficult to see, but Sam had little\par
doubt about it: he longed to get his hands on its neck. But it heard him\par
coming and slipped quickly away. Sam thought he saw a last fleeting glimpse of\par
it, peering back over the edge of the eastward precipice, before it ducked and\par
disappeared.\par
'Well, luck did not let me down,' muttered Sam, 'but that was a near\par
thing! Isn't it enough to have orcs by the thousand without that stinking\par
villain coming nosing round? I wish he had been shot!' He sat down by Frodo\par
and did not rouse him; but he did not dare to go to sleep himself. At last\par
when he felt his eyes closing and knew that his struggle to keep awake could\par
not go on much longer, he wakened Frodo gently.\par
'That Gollum's about again, I'm afraid, Mr. Frodo,' he said. 'Leastways,\par
if it wasn't him, then there's two of him. I went away to find some water and\par
spied him nosing round just as I turned back. I reckon it isn't safe for us\par
both to sleep together, and begging your pardon, but I can't hold up my lids\par
much longer.'\par
'Bless you, Sam!' said Frodo. 'Lie down and take your proper turn! But\par
I'd rather have Gollum than orcs. At any rate he won't give us away to them \endash\par
not unless he's caught himself.'\par
'But he might do a bit of robbery and murder on his own,' growled Sam.\par
'Keep your eyes open, Mr. Frodo! There's a bottle full of water. Drink up. We\par
can fill it again when we go on.' With that Sam plunged into sleep.\par
Light was fading when he woke. Frodo sat propped against the rock behind,\par
but he had fallen asleep. The water-bottle was empty. There was no sign of\par
Gollum.\par
Mordor-dark had returned, and the watch-fires on the heights burned\par
fierce and red, when the hobbits set out again on the most dangerous stage of\par
all their journey. They went first to the little spring, and then climbing\par
warily up they came to the road at the point where it swung east towards the\par
Isenmouthe twenty miles away. It was not a broad road, and it had no wall or\par
parapet along the edge and as it ran on the sheer drop from its brink became\par
deeper and deeper. The hobbits could hear no movements, and after listening\par
for a while they set off eastward at a steady pace.\par
After doing some twelve miles, they halted. A short way back the road had\par
bent a little northward and the stretch that they had passed over was now\par
screened from sight. This proved disastrous. They rested for some minutes and\par
then went on; but they had not taken many steps when suddenly in the stillness\par
of the night they heard the sound that all along they had secretly dreaded:\par
the noise of marching feet. It was still some way behind them, but looking\par
back they could see the twinkle of torches coming round the bend less than a\par
mile away, and they were moving fast: too fast for Frodo to escape by flight\par
along the road ahead.\par
'I feared it, Sam,' said Frodo. 'We've trusted to luck, and it has failed\par
us. We're trapped.' He looked wildly up at the frowning wall, where the roadbuilders\par
of old had cut the rock sheer for many fathoms above their heads. He\par
ran to the other side and looked over the brink into a dark pit of gloom.\par
'We're trapped at last!' he said He sank to the ground beneath the wall of\par
rock and bowed his head.\par
'Seems so,' said Sam. 'Well, we can but wait and see.' And with that he\par
sat down beside Frodo under the shadow of the cliff.\par
They did not have to wait long. The orcs were going at a great pace.\par
Those in the foremost files bore torches. On they came, red flames in the\par
dark, swiftly growing. Now Sam too bowed his head, hoping that it would hide\par
his face when the torches reached them; and he set their shields before their\par
knees to hide their feet.\par
'If only they are in a hurry and will let a couple of tired soldiers\par
alone and pass on!' he thought.\par
And so it seemed that they would. The leading orcs came loping along,\par
panting, holding their heads down. They were a gang of the smaller breeds\par
being driven unwilling to their Dark Lord's wars; all they cared for was to\par
get the march over and escape the whip. Beside them, running up and down the\par
line, went two of the large fierce _uruks_, cracking lashes and shouting. File\par
after file passed, and the tell-tale torchlight was already some way ahead.\par
Sam held his breath. Now more than half the line had gone by. Then suddenly\par
one of the slave-drivers spied the two figures by the road-side. He flicked a\par
whip at them and yelled: 'Hi, you! Get up!' They did not answer, and with a\par
shout he halted the whole company.\par
'Come on, you slugs!' he cried. 'This is no time for slouching.' He took\par
a step towards them, and even in the gloom he recognized the devices on their\par
shields. 'Deserting, eh?' he snarled. 'Or thinking of it? All your folk should\par
have been inside Ud\'fbn before yesterday evening. You know that. Up you get and\par
fall in, or I'll have your numbers and report you.'\par
They struggled to their feet, and keeping bent, limping like footsore\par
soldiers, they shuffled back towards the rear of the line. 'No, not at the\par
rear!' the slave-driver shouted. 'Three files up. And stay there, or you'll\par
know it, when I come down the line!' He sent his long whip-lash cracking over\par
their heads; then with another crack and a yell he started the company off\par
again at a brisk trot.\par
It was hard enough for poor Sam, tired as he was; but for Frodo it was a\par
torment, and soon a nightmare. He set his teeth and tried to stop his mind\par
from thinking, and he struggled on. The stench of the sweating orcs about him\par
was stifling, and he began to gasp with thirst. On, on they went, and he bent\par
all his will to draw his breath and to make his legs keep going; and yet to\par
what evil end he toiled and endured he did not dare to think. There was no\par
hope of falling out unseen: Now and again the orc-driver fell back and jeered\par
at them.\par
'There now!' he laughed, flicking at their legs. 'Where there's a whip\par
there's a will, my slugs. Hold up! I'd give you a nice freshener now, only\par
you'll get as much lash as your skins will carry when you come in late to your\par
camp. Do you good. Don't you know we're at war?'\par
They had gone some miles, and the road was at last running down a long\par
slope into the plain, when Frodo's strength began to give out and his will\par
wavered. He lurched and stumbled. Desperately Sam tried to help him and hold\par
him up, though he felt that he could himself hardly stay the pace much longer.\par
At any moment now he knew that the end would come: his master would faint or\par
fall, and all would be discovered, and their bitter efforts be in vain. 'I'll\par
have that big slave-driving devil anyway,' he thought.\par
Then just as he was putting his hand to the hilt of his sword, there came\par
an unexpected relief. They were out on the plain now and drawing near the\par
entrance to Ud\'fbn. Some way in front of it, before the gate at the bridge-end,\par
the road from the west converged with others coming from the south, and from\par
Barad-d\'fbr. Along all the roads troops were moving; for the Captains of the\par
West were advancing and the Dark Lord was speeding his forces north. So it\par
chanced that several companies came together at the road-meeting, in the dark\par
beyond the light of the watch-fires on the wall. At once there was great\par
jostling and cursing as each troop tried to get first to the gate and the\par
ending of their march. Though the drivers yelled and plied their whips,\par
scuffles broke out and some blades were drawn. A troop of heavy-armed _uruks_\par
from Barad-d\'fbr charged into the Durthang line and threw them into confusion.\par
Dazed as he was with pain and weariness, Sam woke up, grasped quickly at\par
his chance, and threw himself to the ground, dragging Frodo down with him.\par
Orcs fell over them, snarling and cursing. Slowly on hand and knee the hobbits\par
crawled away out of the turmoil, until at last unnoticed they dropped over the\par
further edge of the road. It had a high kerb by which troop-leaders could\par
guide themselves in black night or fog, and it was banked up some feet above\par
the level of the open land.\par
They lay still for a while. It was too dark to seek for cover, if indeed\par
there was any to find; but Sam felt that they ought at least to get further\par
away from the highways and out of the range of torch-light.\par
'Come on, Mr. Frodo!' he whispered. 'One more crawl, and then you can lie\par
still.'\par
With a last despairing effort Frodo raised himself on his hands, and\par
struggled on for maybe twenty yards. Then he pitched down into a shallow pit\par
that opened unexpectedly before them, and there he lay like a dead thing.\par
_Chapter 3_\par
Mount Doom\par
Sam put his ragged orc-cloak under his master's head, and covered them\par
both with the grey robe of L\'f3rien; and as he did so his thoughts went out to\par
that fair land, and to the Elves, and he hoped that the cloth woven by their\par
hands might have some virtue to keep them hidden beyond all hope in this\par
wilderness of fear. He heard the scuffling and cries die down as the troops\par
passed on through the Isenmouthe. It seemed that in the confusion and the\par
mingling of many companies of various kinds they had not been missed, not yet\par
at any rate.\par
Sam took a sip of water, but pressed Frodo to drink, and when his master\par
had recovered a little he gave him a whole wafer of their precious waybread\par
and made him eat it. Then, too worn out even to feel much fear, they stretched\par
themselves out. They slept a little in uneasy fits; for their sweat grew chill\par
on them, and the hard stones bit them, and they shivered. Out of the north\par
from the Black Gate through Cirith Gorgor there flowed whispering along the\par
ground a thin cold air.\par
In the morning a grey light came again, for in the high regions the West\par
Wind still blew, but down on the stones behind the fences of the Black Land\par
the air seemed almost dead, chill and yet stifling. Sam looked up out of the\par
hollow. The land all about was dreary, flat and drab-hued. On the roads nearby\par
nothing was moving now; but Sam feared the watchful eyes on the wall of the\par
Isenmouthe, no more than a furlong away northward. South-eastward, far off\par
like a dark standing shadow. loomed the Mountain. Smokes were pouring from it\par
and while those that rose into the upper air trailed away eastward, great\par
rolling clouds floated down its sides and spread over the land. A few miles to\par
the north-east the foothills of the Ashen Mountains stood like sombre grey\par
ghosts, behind which the misty northern heights rose like a line of distant\par
cloud hardly darker than the lowering sky.\par
Sam tried to guess the distances and to decide what way they ought to\par
take. It looks every step of fifty miles,' he muttered gloomily staring at the\par
threatening mountain, 'and that'll take a week, if it takes a day, with Mr.\par
Frodo as he is.' He shook his head, and as he worked things out, slowly a new\par
dark thought grew in his mind. Never for long had hope died in his staunch\par
heart, and always until now he had taken some thought for their return. But\par
the bitter truth came home to him at last: at best their provision would take\par
them to their goal; and when the task was done, there they would come to an\par
end, alone, houseless, foodless in the midst of a terrible desert. There could\par
be no return.\par
'So that was the job I felt I had to do when I started,' thought Sam: 'to\par
help Mr. Frodo to the last step and then die with him? Well, if that is the\par
job then I must do it. But I would dearly like to see Bywater again, and Rosie\par
Cotton and her brothers, and the Gaffer and Marigold and all. I can't think\par
somehow that Gandalf would have sent Mr. Frodo on this errand if there hadn't\par
a' been any hope of his ever coming back at all. Things all went wrong when he\par
went down in Moria. I wish he hadn't. He would have done something.'\par
But even as hope died in Sam, or seemed to die, it was turned to a new\par
strength. Sam's plain hobbit-face grew stern, almost grim, as the will\par
hardened in him, and he felt through all his limbs a thrill, as if he was\par
turning into some creature of stone and steel that neither despair nor\par
weariness nor endless barren miles could subdue.\par
With a new sense of responsibility he brought his eyes back to the ground\par
near at hand, studying the next move. As the light grew a little he saw to his\par
surprise that what from a distance had seemed wide and featureless flats were\par
in fact all broken and tumbled. Indeed the whole surface of the plains of\par
Gorgoroth was pocked with great holes, as if, while it was still a waste of\par
soft mud, it had been smitten with a shower of bolts and huge slingstones. The\par
largest of these holes were rimmed with ridges of broken rock, and broad\par
fissures ran out from them in all directions. It was a land in which it would\par
be possible to creep from hiding to hiding, unseen by all but the most\par
watchful eyes: possible at least for one who was strong and had no need for\par
speed. For the hungry and worn, who had far to go before life failed, it had\par
an evil look.\par
Thinking of all these things Sam went back to his master. He had no need\par
to rouse him. Frodo was lying on his back with eyes open, staring at the\par
cloudy sky. 'Well, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, 'I've been having a look round and\par
thinking a bit. There's nothing on the roads, and we'd best be getting away\par
while there's a chance. Can you manage it?'\par
'I can manage it,' said Frodo. 'I must.'\par
Once more they started, crawling from hollow to hollow, flitting behind\par
such cover as they could find, but moving always in a slant towards the\par
foothills of the northern range. But as they went the most easterly of the\par
roads followed them, until it ran off, hugging the skirts of the mountains,\par
away into a wall of black shadow far ahead. Neither man nor orc now moved\par
along its flat grey stretches; for the Dark Lord had almost completed the\par
movement of his forces, and even in the fastness of his own realm he sought\par
the secrecy of night, fearing the winds of the world that had turned against\par
him, tearing aside his veils, and troubled with tidings of bold spies that had\par
passed through his fences.\par
The hobbits had gone a few weary miles when they halted. Frodo seemed\par
nearly spent. Sam saw that he could not go much further in this fashion,\par
crawling, stooping, now picking a doubtful way very slowly, now hurrying at a\par
stumbling run.\par
'I'm going back on to the road while the light lasts, Mr. Frodo,' he\par
said. 'Trust to luck again! It nearly failed us last time, but it didn't\par
quite. A steady pace for a few more miles, and then a rest.'\par
He was taking a far greater risk than he knew; but Frodo was too much\par
occupied with his burden and with the struggle in his mind to debate, and\par
almost too hopeless to care. They climbed on to the causeway and trudged\par
along, down the hard cruel road that led to the Dark Tower itself. But their\par
luck held, and for the rest of that day they met no living or moving thing;\par
and when night fell they vanished into the darkness of Mordor. All the land\par
now brooded as at the coming of a great storm: for the Captains of the West\par
had passed the Cross-roads and set flames in the deadly fields of Imlad\par
Morgul.\par
So the desperate journey went on, as the Ring went south and the banners\par
of the kings rode north. For the hobbits each day, each mile. was more bitter\par
than the one before, as their strength lessened and the land became more evil.\par
They met no enemies by day. At times by night, as they cowered or drowsed\par
uneasily in some hiding beside the road, they heard cries and the noise of\par
many feet or the swift passing of some cruelly ridden steed. But far worse\par
than all such perils was the ever-approaching threat that beat upon them as\par
they went: the dreadful menace of the Power that waited, brooding in deep\par
thought and sleepless malice behind the dark veil about its Throne. Nearer and\par
nearer it drew, looming blacker, like the oncoming of a wall of night at the\par
last end of the world.\par
There came at last a dreadful nightfall; and even as the Captains of the\par
West drew near to the end of the living lands, the two wanderers came to an\par
hour of blank despair. Four days had passed since they had escaped from the\par
orcs, but the time lay behind them like an ever-darkening dream. All this last\par
day Frodo had not spoken, but had walked half-bowed, often stumbling, as if\par
his eyes no longer saw the way before his feet. Sam guessed that among all\par
their pains he bore the worst, the growing weight of the Ring, a burden on the\par
body and a torment to his mind. Anxiously Sam had noted how his master's left\par
hand would often be raised as if to ward on a blow, or to screen his shrinking\par
eyes from a dreadful Eye that sought to look in them. And sometimes his right\par
hand would creep to his breast, clutching, and then slowly, as the will\par
recovered mastery, it would be withdrawn.\par
Now as the blackness of night returned Frodo sat, his head between his\par
knees, his arms hanging wearily to the ground where his hands lay feebly\par
twitching. Sam watched him, till night covered them both and hid them from one\par
another. He could no longer find any words to say; and he turned to his own\par
dark thoughts. As for himself, though weary and under a shadow of fear, he\par
still had some strength left. The _lembas_ had a virtue without which they\par
would long ago have lain down to die. It did not satisfy desire, and at times\par
Sam's mind was filled with the memories of food, and the longing for simple\par
bread and meats. And yet this waybread of the Elves had a potency that\par
increased as travellers relied on it alone and did not mingle it with other\par
foods. It fed the will, and it gave strength to endure, and to master sinew\par
and limb beyond the measure of mortal kind. But now a new decision must be\par
made. They could not follow this road any longer; for it went on eastward into\par
the great Shadow, but the Mountain now loomed upon their right, almost due\par
south, and they must turn towards it. Yet still before it there stretched a\par
wide region of fuming, barren, ash-ridden land.\par
'Water, water!' muttered Sam. He had stinted himself, and in his parched\par
mouth his tongue seemed thick and swollen; but for all his care they now had\par
very little left, perhaps half his bottle, and maybe there were still days to\par
go. All would long ago have been spent, if they had not dared to follow the\par
orc-road. For at long intervals on that highway cisterns had been built for\par
the use of troops sent in haste through the waterless regions. In one Sam had\par
found some water left, stale, muddied by the orcs, but still sufficient for\par
their desperate case. Yet that was now a day ago. There was no hope of any\par
more.\par
At last wearied with his cares Sam drowsed, leaving the morrow till it\par
came; he could do no more. Dream and waking mingled uneasily. He saw lights\par
like gloating yes, and dark creeping shapes, and he heard noises as of wild\par
beasts or the dreadful cries of tortured things; and he would start up to find\par
the world all dark and only empty blackness all about him. Once only, as he\par
stood and stared wildly round, did it seem that, though now awake, he could\par
still see pale lights like eyes; but soon they flickered and vanished.\par
The hateful night passed slowly and reluctantly. Such daylight as\par
followed was dim; for here as the Mountain drew near the air was ever mirky,\par
while out from the Dark Tower there crept the veils of Shadow that Sauron wove\par
about himself. Frodo was lying on his back not moving. Sam stood beside him,\par
reluctant to speak, and yet knowing that the word now lay with him: he must\par
set his master's will to work for another effort. At length, stooping and\par
caressing Frodo's brow, he spoke in his ear.\par
'Wake up, Master!' he said. 'Time for another start.'\par
As if roused by a sudden bell, Frodo rose quickly, and stood up and\par
looked away southwards; but when his eyes beheld the Mountain and the desert\par
he quailed again.\par
'I can't manage it, Sam,' he said. 'It is such a weight to carry, such a\par
weight.'\par
Sam knew before he spoke, that it was vain, and that such words might do\par
more harm than good, but in his pity he could not keep silent. 'Then let me\par
carry it a bit for you, Master,' he said. 'You know I would, and gladly, as\par
long as I have any strength.'\par
A wild light came into Frodo's eyes. 'Stand away! Don't touch me!' he\par
cried. 'It is mine, I say. Be off!' His hand strayed to his sword-hilt. But\par
then quickly his voice changed. 'No, no, Sam,' he said sadly. 'But you must\par
understand. It is my burden, and no one else can bear it. It is too late now,\par
Sam dear. You can't help me in that way again. I am almost in its power now. I\par
could not give it up, and if you tried to take it I should go mad.'\par
Sam nodded. 'I understand,' he said. 'But I've been thinking, Mr. Frodo,\par
there's other things we might do without. Why not lighten the load a bit?\par
We're going that way now, as straight as we can make it.' He pointed to the\par
Mountain. 'It's no good taking anything we're not sure to need.'\par
Frodo looked again towards the Mountain. 'No,' he said, 'we shan't need\par
much on that road. And at its end nothing.' Picking up his orc-shield he flung\par
it away and threw his helmet after it. Then pulling off the grey cloak he\par
undid the heavy belt and let it fall to the ground, and the sheathed sword\par
with it. The shreds of the black cloak he tore off and scattered.\par
'There, I'll be an orc no more,' he cried, 'and I'll bear no weapon fair\par
or foul. Let them take me, if they will!'\par
Sam did likewise, and put aside his orc-gear; and he took out all the\par
things in his pack. Somehow each of them had become dear to him, if only\par
because he had borne them so far with so much toil. Hardest of all it was to\par
part with his cooking-gear. Tears welled in his eyes at the thought of casting\par
it away.\par
'Do you remember that bit of rabbit, Mr. Frodo?' he said. 'And our place\par
under the warm bank in Captain Faramir's country, the day I saw an oliphaunt?'\par
'No, I am afraid not, Sam,' said Frodo. 'At least, I know that such\par
things happened, but I cannot see them. No taste of food, no feel of water, no\par
sound of wind, no memory of tree or grass or flower, no image of moon or star\par
are left to me. I am naked in the dark. Sam, and there is no veil between me\par
and the wheel of fire. I begin to see it even with my waking eyes, and all\par
else fades.'\par
Sam went to him and kissed his hand. 'Then the sooner we're rid of it,\par
the sooner to rest,' he said haltingly, finding no better words to say.\par
'Talking won't mend nothing,' he muttered to himself, as he gathered up all\par
the things that they had chosen to cast away. He was not willing to leave them\par
lying open in the wilderness for any eyes to see. 'Stinker picked up that orcshirt,\par
seemingly, and he isn't going to add a sword to it. His hands are bad\par
enough when empty. And he isn't going to mess with my pans!' With that he\par
carried all the gear away to one of the many gaping fissures that scored the\par
land and threw them in. The clatter of his precious pans as they fell down\par
into the dark was like a death-knell to his heart.\par
He came back to Frodo, and then of his elven-rope he cut a short piece to\par
serve his master as a girdle and bind the grey cloak close about his waist.\par
The rest he carefully coiled and put back in his pack. Beside that he kept\par
only the remnants of their waybread and the water-bottle, and Sting still\par
hanging by his belt; and hidden away in a pocket of his tunic next his breast\par
the phial of Galadriel and the little box that she gave him for his own.\par
Now at last they turned their faces to the Mountain and set out, thinking\par
no more of concealment, bending their weariness and failing wills only to the\par
one task of going on. In the dimness of its dreary day few things even in that\par
land of vigilance could have espied them, save from close at hand. Of all the\par
slaves of the Dark Lord, only the Nazg\'fbl could have warned him of the peril\par
that crept, small but indomitable, into the very heart of his guarded realm.\par
But the Nazg\'fbl and their black wings were abroad on another errand: they were\par
gathered far away, shadowing the march of the Captains of the West, and\par
thither the thought of the Dark Tower was turned.\par
That day it seemed to Sam that his master had found some new strength,\par
more than could be explained by the small lightening of the load that he had\par
to carry. In the first marches they went further and faster than he had hoped.\par
The land was rough and hostile, and yet they made much progress, and ever the\par
Mountain drew nearer. But as the day wore on and all too soon the dim light\par
began to fail, Frodo stooped again, and began to stagger, as if the renewed\par
effort had squandered his remaining strength.\par
At their last halt he sank down and said: 'I'm thirsty, Sam,' and did not\par
speak again. Sam gave him a mouthful of water; only one more mouthful\par
remained. He went without himself; and now as once more the night of Mordor\par
closed over them, through all his thoughts there came the memory of water; and\par
every brook or stream or fount that he had ever seen, under green willowshades\par
or twinkling in the sun, danced and rippled for his torment behind the\par
blindness of his eyes. He felt the cool mud about his toes as he paddled in\par
the Pool at Bywater with Jolly Cotton and Tom and Nibs, and their sister\par
Rosie. 'But that was years ago,' he sighed, 'and far away. The way back, if\par
there is one, goes past the Mountain.'\par
He could not sleep and he held a debate with himself. 'Well, come now,\par
we've done better than you hoped,' he said sturdily. 'Began well anyway. I\par
reckon we crossed half the distance before we stopped. One more day will do\par
it.' And then he paused.\par
'Don't be a fool, Sam Gamgee,' came an answer in his own voice. 'He won't\par
go another day like that, if he moves at all. And you can't go on much longer\par
giving him all the water and most of the food.'\par
'I can go on a good way though, and I will.'\par
'Where to?'\par
'To the Mountain, of course.'\par
'But what then, Sam Gamgee, what then? When you get there, what are you\par
going to do? He won't be able to do anything for himself.'\par
To his dismay Sam realized that he had not got an answer to this. He had\par
no clear idea at all. Frodo had not spoken much to him of his errand, and Sam\par
only knew vaguely that the Ring had somehow to be put into the fire. 'The\par
Cracks of Doom,' he muttered, the old name rising to his mind. 'Well, if\par
Master knows how to find them, I don't.'\par
'There you are!' came the answer. 'It's all quite useless. He said so\par
himself. You are the fool, going on hoping and toiling. You could have lain\par
down and gone to sleep together days ago, if you hadn't been so dogged. But\par
you'll die just the same, or worse. You might just as well lie down now and\par
give it up. You'll never get to the top anyway.'\par
'I'll get there, if I leave everything but my bones behind,' said Sam.\par
'And I'll carry Mr. Frodo up myself, if it breaks my back and heart. So stop\par
arguing!'\par
At that moment Sam felt a tremor in the ground beneath him, and he heard\par
or sensed a deep remote rumble as of thunder imprisoned under the earth. There\par
was a brief red flame that flickered under the clouds and died away. The\par
Mountain too slept uneasily.\par
The last stage of their journey to Orodruin came, and it was a torment\par
greater than Sam had ever thought that he could bear. He was in pain, and so\par
parched that he could no longer swallow even a mouthful of food. It remained\par
dark, not only because of the smokes of the Mountain: there seemed to be a\par
storm coming up, and away to the south-east there was a shimmer of lightnings\par
under the black skies. Worst of all, the air was full of fumes; breathing was\par
painful and difficult, and a dizziness came on them, so that they staggered\par
and often fell. And yet their wills did not yield, and they struggled on.\par
The Mountain crept up ever nearer, until, if they lifted their heavy\par
heads, it filled all their sight, looming vast before them: a huge mass of ash\par
and slag and burned stone, out of which a sheer-sided cone was raised into the\par
clouds. Before the daylong dusk ended and true night came again they had\par
crawled and stumbled to its very feet.\par
With a gasp Frodo cast himself on the ground. Sam sat by him. To his\par
surprise he felt tired but lighter, and his head seemed clear again. No more\par
debates disturbed his mind. He knew all the arguments of despair and would not\par
listen to them. His will was set, and only death would break it. He felt no\par
longer either desire or need of sleep, but rather of watchfulness. He knew\par
that all the hazards and perils were now drawing together to a point: the next\par
day would be a day of doom, the day of final effort or disaster, the last\par
gasp.\par
But when would it come? The night seemed endless and timeless, minute\par
after minute falling dead and adding up to no passing hour, bringing no\par
change. Sam began to wonder if a second darkness had begun and no day would\par
ever reappear. At last he groped for Frodo's hand. It was cold and trembling.\par
His master was shivering.\par
'I didn't ought to have left my blanket behind,' muttered Sam; and lying\par
down he tried to comfort Frodo with his arms and body. Then sleep took him,\par
and the dim light of the last day of their quest found them side by side. The\par
wind had fallen the day before as it shifted from the West, and now it came\par
from the North and began to rise; and slowly the light of the unseen Sun\par
filtered down into the shadows where the hobbits lay.\par
'Now for it! Now for the last gasp!' said Sam as he struggled to his\par
feet. He bent over Frodo, rousing him gently. Frodo groaned; but with a great\par
effort of will he staggered up; and then he fell upon his knees again. He\par
raised his eyes with difficulty to the dark slopes of Mount Doom towering\par
above him, and then pitifully he began to crawl forward on his hands.\par
Sam looked at him and wept in his heart, but no tears came to his dry and\par
stinging eyes. 'I said I'd carry him, if it broke my back,' he muttered, 'and\par
I will!'\par
'Come, Mr. Frodo!' he cried. 'I can't carry it for you, but I can carry\par
you and it as well. So up you get! Come on, Mr. Frodo dear! Sam will give you\par
a ride. Just tell him where to go, and he'll go.'\par
As Frodo clung upon his back, arms loosely about his neck, legs clasped\par
firmly under his arms, Sam staggered to his feet; and then to his amazement he\par
felt the burden light. He had feared that he would have barely strength to\par
lift his master alone, and beyond that he had expected to share in the\par
dreadful dragging weight of the accursed Ring. But it was not so. Whether\par
because Frodo was so worn by his long pains, wound of knife, and venomous\par
sting, and sorrow, fear, and homeless wandering, or because some gift of final\par
strength was given to him, Sam lifted Frodo with no more difficulty than if he\par
were carrying a hobbit-child pig-a-back in some romp on the lawns or hayfields\par
of the Shire. He took a deep breath and started off.\par
They had reached the Mountain's foot on its northern side, and a little\par
to the westward; there its long grey slopes, though broken, were not sheer.\par
Frodo did not speak, and so Sam struggled on as best he could, having no\par
guidance but the will to climb as high as might be before his strength gave\par
out and his will broke. On he toiled, up and up, turning this way and that to\par
lessen the slope, often stumbling forward, and at the last crawling like a\par
snail with a heavy burden on its back. When his will could drive him no\par
further, and his limbs gave way, he stopped and laid his master gently down.\par
Frodo opened his eyes and drew a breath. It was easier to breathe up here\par
above the reeks that coiled and drifted down below. 'Thank you, Sam,' he said\par
in a cracked whisper. 'How far is there to go?'\par
'I don't know,' said Sam, 'because I don't know where we're going.'\par
He looked back, and then he looked up; and he was amazed to see how far\par
his last effort had brought him. The Mountain standing ominous and alone had\par
looked taller than it was. Sam saw now that it was less lofty than the high\par
passes of the Ephel D\'faath which he and Frodo had scaled. The confused and\par
tumbled shoulders of its great base rose for maybe three thousand feet above\par
the plain, and above them was reared half as high again its tall central cone,\par
like a vast oast or chimney capped with a jagged crater. But already Sam was\par
more than half way up the base, and the plain of Gorgoroth was dim below him,\par
wrapped in fume and shadow. As he looked up he would have given a shout. if\par
his parched throat had allowed him; for amid the rugged humps and shoulders\par
above him he saw plainly a path or road. It climbed like a rising girdle from\par
the west and wound snakelike about the Mountain, until before it went round\par
out of view it reached the foot of the cone upon its eastern side.\par
Sam could not see the course immediately above him, where it was lowest,\par
for a steep slope went up from where he stood; but he guessed that if he could\par
only struggle on just a little way further up, they would strike this path. A\par
gleam of hope returned to him. They might conquer the Mountain yet. 'Why, it\par
might have been put there a-purpose!' he said to himself. 'If it wasn't there,\par
I'd have to say I was beaten in the end.'\par
The path was not put there for the purposes of Sam. He did not know it,\par
but he was looking at Sauron's Road from Barad-d\'fbr to the Sammath Naur, the\par
Chambers of Fire. Out from the Dark Tower's huge western gate it came over a\par
deep abyss by a vast bridge of iron, and then passing into the plain it ran\par
for a league between two smoking chasms, and so reached a long sloping\par
causeway that led up on to the Mountain's eastern side. Thence, turning and\par
encircling all its wide girth from south to north, it climbed at last, high in\par
the upper cone, but still far from the reeking summit, to a dark entrance that\par
gazed back east straight to the Window of the Eye in Sauron's shadow-mantled\par
fortress. Often blocked or destroyed by the tumults of the Mountain's\par
furnaces, always that road was repaired and cleaned again by the labours of\par
countless orcs.\par
Sam drew a deep breath. There was a path, but how he was to get up the\par
slope to it he did not know. First he must ease his aching back. He lay flat\par
beside Frodo for a while. Neither spoke. Slowly the light grew. Suddenly a\par
sense of urgency which he did not understand came to Sam. It was almost as if\par
he had been called: 'Now, now, or it will be too late!' He braced himself and\par
got up. Frodo also seemed to have felt the call. He struggled to his knees.\par
'I'll crawl, Sam,' he gasped.\par
So foot by foot, like small grey insects, they crept up the slope. They\par
came to the path and found that it was broad, paved with broken rubble and\par
beaten ash. Frodo clambered on to it, and then moved as if by some compulsion\par
he turned slowly to face the East. Far off the shadows of Sauron hung; but\par
torn by some gust of wind out of the world, or else moved by some great\par
disquiet within, the mantling clouds swirled, and for a moment drew aside; and\par
then he saw, rising black, blacker and darker than the vast shades amid which\par
it stood, the cruel pinnacles and iron crown of the topmost tower of Baradd\'fbr.\par
One moment only it stared out, but as from some great window immeasurably\par
high there stabbed northward a flame of red, the flicker of a piercing Eye;\par
and then the shadows were furled again and the terrible vision was removed.\par
The Eye was not turned to them: it was gazing north to where the Captains of\par
the West stood at bay, and thither all its malice was now bent, as the Power\par
moved to strike its deadly blow; but Frodo at that dreadful glimpse fell as\par
one stricken mortally. His hand sought the chain about his neck.\par
Sam knelt by him. Faint, almost inaudibly, he heard Frodo whispering:\par
'Help me, Sam! Help me, Sam! Hold my hand! I can't stop it.' Sam took his\par
master's hands and laid them together, palm to palm, and kissed them; and then\par
he held them gently between his own. The thought came suddenly to him: 'He's\par
spotted us! It's all up, or it soon will be. Now, Sam Gamgee, this is the end\par
of ends.'\par
Again he lifted Frodo and drew his hands down to his own breast. letting\par
his master's legs dangle. Then he bowed his head and struggled off along the\par
climbing road. It was not as easy a way to take as it had looked at first. By\par
fortune the fires that had poured forth in the great turmoils when Sam stood\par
upon Cirith Ungol had flowed down mainly on the southern and western slopes,\par
and the road on this side was not blocked. Yet in many places it had crumbled\par
away or was crossed by gaping rents. After climbing eastward for some time it\par
bent back upon itself at a sharp angle and went westward fox a space. There at\par
the bend it was cut deep through a crag of old weathered stone once long ago\par
vomited from the Mountain's furnaces. Panting under his load Sam turned the\par
bend; and even as he did so, out of the corner of his eye, he had a glimpse of\par
something falling from the crag, like a small piece of black stone that had\par
toppled off as he passed.\par
A sudden weight smote him and he crashed forward, tearing the backs of\par
his hands that still clasped his master's. Then he knew what had happened, for\par
above him as he lay he heard a hated voice.\par
'Wicked masster!' it hissed. 'Wicked masster cheats us; cheats Sm\'e9agol,\par
_gollum_. He musstn't go that way. He musstn't hurt Preciouss. Give it to\par
Sm\'e9agol, yess, give it to us! Give it to uss!'\par
With a violent heave Sam rose up. At once he drew his sword; but he could\par
do nothing. Gollum and Frodo were locked together. Gollum was tearing at his\par
master, trying to get at the chain and the Ring. This was probably the only\par
thing that could have roused the dying embers of Frodo's heart and will: an\par
attack, an attempt to wrest his treasure from him by force. He fought back\par
with a sudden fury that amazed Sam, and Gollum also. Even so things might have\par
gone far otherwise, if Gollum himself had remained unchanged; but whatever\par
dreadful paths, lonely and hungry and waterless, he had trodden, driven by a\par
devouring desire and a terrible fear, they had left grievous marks on him. He\par
was a lean, starved, haggard thing, all bones and tight-drawn sallow skin. A\par
wild light flamed in his eyes, but his malice was no longer matched by his old\par
griping strength. Frodo flung him off and rose up quivering.\par
'Down, down!' he gasped, clutching his hand to his breast, so that\par
beneath the cover of his leather shirt he clasped the Ring. 'Down you creeping\par
thing, and out of my path! Your time is at an end. You cannot betray me or\par
slay me now.'\par
Then suddenly, as before under the eaves of the Emyn Muil, Sam saw these\par
two rivals with other vision. A crouching shape, scarcely more than the shadow\par
of a living thing, a creature now wholly ruined and defeated, yet filled with\par
a hideous lust and rage; and before it stood stern, untouchable now by pity, a\par
figure robed in white, but at its breast it held a wheel of fire. Out of the\par
fire there spoke a commanding voice.\par
'Begone, and trouble me no more! If you touch me ever again, you shall be\par
cast yourself into the Fire of Doom.'\par
The crouching shape backed away, terror in its blinking eyes, and yet at\par
the same time insatiable desire.\par
Then the vision passed and Sam saw Frodo standing, hand on breast, his\par
breath coming in great gasps, and Gollum at his feet, resting on his knees\par
with his wide-splayed hands upon the ground.\par
'Look out!' cried Sam. 'He'll spring!' He stepped forward, brandishing\par
his sword. 'Quick, Master!' he gasped. 'Go on! Go on! No time to lose. I'll\par
deal with him. Go on!'\par
Frodo looked at him as if at one now far away. 'Yes, I must go on,' he\par
said. 'Farewell, Sam! This is the end at last. On Mount Doom doom shall fall.\par
Farewell!' He turned and went on, walking slowly but erect up the climbing\par
path.\par
'Now!' said Sam. 'At last I can deal with you!' He leaped forward with\par
drawn blade ready for battle. But Gollum did not spring. He fell flat upon the\par
ground and whimpered.\par
'Don't kill us,' he wept. 'Don't hurt us with nassty cruel steel! Let us\par
live, yes, live just a little longer. Lost lost! We're lost. And when Precious\par
goes we'll die, yes, die into the dust.' He clawed up the ashes of the path\par
with his long fleshless fingers. 'Dusst!' he hissed.\par
Sam's hand wavered. His mind was hot with wrath and the memory of evil.\par
It would be just to slay this treacherous, murderous creature, just and many\par
times deserved; and also it seemed the only safe thing to do. But deep in his\par
heart there was something that restrained him: he could not strike this thing\par
lying in the dust, forlorn, ruinous, utterly wretched. He himself, though only\par
for a little while, had borne the Ring, and now dimly he guessed the agony of\par
Gollum's shrivelled mind and body, enslaved to that Ring, unable to find peace\par
or relief ever in life again. But Sam had no words to express what he felt.\par
'Oh, curse you, you stinking thing!' he said. 'Go away! Be off! I don't\par
trust you, not as far as I could kick you; but be off. Or I _shall_ hurt you,\par
yes, with nasty cruel steel.'\par
Gollum got up on all fours, and backed away for several paces, and then\par
he turned, and as Sam aimed a kick at him he fled away down the path. Sam gave\par
no more heed to him. He suddenly remembered his master. He looked up the path\par
and could not see him. As fast as he could he trudged up the road. If he had\par
looked back, he might have seen not far below Gollum turn again, and then with\par
a wild light of madness glaring in his eyes come, swiftly but warily, creeping\par
on behind, a slinking shadow among the stones.\par
The path climbed on. Soon it bent again and. with a last eastward course\par
passed in a cutting along the face of the cone and came to the dark door in\par
the Mountain's side, the door of the Sammath Naur. Far away now rising towards\par
the South the sun, piercing the smokes and haze, burned ominous, a dull\par
bleared disc of red; but all Mordor lay about the Mountain like a dead land,\par
silent, shadow-folded, waiting for some dreadful stroke.\par
Sam came to the gaping mouth and peered in. It was dark and hot, and a\par
deep rumbling shook the air. 'Frodo! Master!' he called. There was no answer.\par
For a moment he stood, his heart beating with wild fears, and then he plunged\par
in. A shadow followed him.\par
At first he could see nothing. In his great need he drew out once more\par
the phial of Galadriel, but it was pale and cold in his trembling hand and\par
threw no light into that stifling dark. He was come to the heart of the realm\par
of Sauron and the forges of his ancient might, greatest in Middle-earth; all\par
other powers were here subdued. Fearfully he took a few uncertain steps in the\par
dark, and then all at once there came a flash of red that leaped upward, and\par
smote the high black roof. Then Sam saw that he was in a long cave or tunnel\par
that bored into the Mountain's smoking cone. But only a short way ahead its\par
floor and the walls on either side were cloven by a great fissure, out of\par
which the red glare came, now leaping up, now dying down into darkness; and\par
all the while far below there was a rumour and a trouble as of great engines\par
throbbing and labouring.\par
The light sprang up again, and there on the brink of the chasm, at the\par
very Crack of Doom, stood Frodo, black against the glare, tense, erect, but\par
still as if he had been turned to stone.\par
'Master!' cried Sam.\par
Then Frodo stirred and spoke with a clear voice, indeed with a voice\par
clearer and more powerful than Sam had ever heard him use, and it rose above\par
the throb and turmoil of Mount Doom, ringing in the roof and walls.\par
'I have come,' he said. 'But I do not choose now to do what I came to do.\par
I will not do this deed. The Ring is mine!' And suddenly, as he set it on his\par
finger, he vanished from Sam's sight. Sam gasped, but he had no chance to cry\par
out, for at that moment many things happened.\par
Something struck Sam violently in the back, his legs were knocked from\par
under him and he was flung aside, striking his head against the stony floor,\par
as a dark shape sprang over him. He lay still and for a moment all went black.\par
And far away, as Frodo put on the Ring and claimed it for his own, even\par
in Sammath Naur the very heart of his realm, the Power in Barad-d\'fbr was\par
shaken, and the Tower trembled from its foundations to its proud and bitter\par
crown. The Dark Lord was suddenly aware of him, and his Eye piercing all\par
shadows looked across the plain to the door that he had made; and the\par
magnitude of his own folly was revealed to him in a blinding flash, and all\par
the devices of his enemies were at last laid bare. Then his wrath blazed in\par
consuming flame, but his fear rose like a vast black smoke to choke him. For\par
he knew his deadly peril and the thread upon which his doom now hung.\par
From all his policies and webs of fear and treachery, from all his\par
stratagems and wars his mind shook free; and throughout his realm a tremor\par
ran, his slaves quailed, and his armies halted, and his captains suddenly\par
steerless, bereft of will, wavered and despaired. For they were forgotten. The\par
whole mind and purpose of the Power that wielded them was now bent with\par
overwhelming force upon the Mountain. At his summons, wheeling with a rending\par
cry, in a last desperate race there flew, faster than the winds, the Nazg\'fbl\par
the Ringwraiths, and with a storm of wings they hurtled southwards to Mount\par
Doom.\par
Sam got up. He was dazed, and blood streaming from his head dripped in\par
his eyes. He groped forward, and then he saw a strange and terrible thing.\par
Gollum on the edge of the abyss was fighting like a mad thing with an unseen\par
foe. To and fro he swayed, now so near the brink that almost he tumbled in,\par
now dragging back, falling to the ground, rising, and falling again. And all\par
the while he hissed but spoke no words.\par
The fires below awoke in anger, the red light blazed, and all the cavern\par
was filled with a great glare and heat. Suddenly Sam saw Gollum's long hands\par
draw upwards to his mouth; his white fangs gleamed, and then snapped as they\par
bit. Frodo gave a cry, and there he was, fallen upon his knees at the chasm's\par
edge. But Gollum, dancing like a mad thing, held aloft the ring, a finger\par
still thrust within its circle. It shone now as if verily it was wrought of\par
living fire.\par
'Precious, precious, precious!' Gollum cried. 'My Precious! O my\par
Precious!' And with that, even as his eyes were lifted up to gloat on his\par
prize, he stepped too far, toppled, wavered for a moment on the brink, and\par
then with a shriek he fell. Out of the depths came his last wail _Precious_,\par
and he was gone.\par
There was a roar and a great confusion of noise. Fires leaped up and\par
licked the roof. The throbbing grew to a great tumult, and the Mountain shook.\par
Sam ran to Frodo and picked him up and carried him. out to the door. And there\par
upon the dark threshold of the Sammath Naur, high above the plains of Mordor,\par
such wonder and terror came on him that he stood still forgetting all else,\par
and gazed as one turned to stone.\par
A brief vision he had of swirling cloud, and in the midst of it towers\par
and battlements, tall as hills, founded upon a mighty mountain-throne above\par
immeasurable pits; great courts and dungeons, eyeless prisons sheer as cliffs,\par
and gaping gates of steel and adamant: and then all passed. Towers fell and\par
mountains slid; walls crumbled and melted, crashing down; vast spires of smoke\par
and spouting steams went billowing up, up, until they toppled like an\par
overwhelming wave, and its wild crest curled and came foaming down upon the\par
land. And then at last over the miles between there came a rumble, rising to a\par
deafening crash and roar; the earth shook, the plain heaved and cracked, and\par
Orodruin reeled. Fire belched from its riven summit. The skies burst into\par
thunder seared with lightning. Down like lashing whips fell a torrent of black\par
rain. And into the heart of the storm, with a cry that pierced all other\par
sounds, tearing the clouds asunder, the Nazg\'fbl came, shooting like flaming\par
bolts, as caught in the fiery ruin of hill and sky they crackled, withered,\par
and went out.\par
'Well, this is the end, Sam Gamgee,' said a voice by his side. And there\par
was Frodo, pale and worn, and yet himself again; and in his eyes there was\par
peace now, neither strain of will, nor madness, nor any fear. His burden was\par
taken away. There was the dear master of the sweet days in the Shire.\par
'Master!' cried Sam. and fell upon his knees. In all that ruin of the\par
world for the moment he felt only joy, great joy. The burden was gone. His\par
master had been saved; he was himself again, he was free. And then Sam caught\par
sight of the maimed and bleeding hand.\par
'Your poor hand!' he said. 'And I have nothing to bind it with, or\par
comfort it. I would have spared him a whole hand of mine rather. But he's gone\par
now beyond recall, gone for ever.'\par
'Yes,' said Frodo. 'But do you remember Gandalf's words: _Even Gollum may\par
have something yet to do?_ But for him, Sam, I could not have destroyed the\par
Ring. The Quest would have been in vain, even at the bitter end. So let us\par
forgive him! For the Quest is achieved, and now all is over. I am glad you are\par
here with me. Here at the end of all things, Sam.'\par
_Chapter 4_\par
The Field of Cormallen\par
All about the hills the hosts of Mordor raged. The Captains of the West\par
were foundering in a gathering sea. The sun gleamed red, and under the wings\par
of the Nazg\'fbl the shadows of death fell dark upon the earth. Aragorn stood\par
beneath his banner, silent and stern, as one lost in thought of things long\par
past or far away; but his eyes gleamed like stars that shine the brighter as\par
the night deepens. Upon the hill-top stood Gandalf, and he was white and cold\par
and no shadow fell on him. The onslaught of Mordor broke like a wave on the\par
beleaguered hills, voices roaring like a tide amid the wreck and crash of\par
arms.\par
As if to his eyes some sudden vision had been given, Gandalf stirred; and\par
he turned, looking back north where the skies were pale and clear. Then he\par
lifted up his hands and cried in a loud voice ringing above the din: _The\par
Eagles are coming!_ And many voices answered crying: _The Eagles are coming!\par
The Eagles are coming!_ The hosts of Mordor looked up and wondered what this\par
sign might mean.\par
There came Gwaihir the Windlord, and Landroval his brother, greatest of\par
all the Eagles of the North, mightiest of the descendants of old Thorondor,\par
who built his eyries in the inaccessible peaks of the Encircling Mountains\par
when Middle-earth was young. Behind them in long swift lines came all their\par
vassals from the northern mountains, speeding on a gathering wind. Straight\par
down upon the Nazg\'fbl they bore, stooping suddenly out of the high airs, and\par
the rush of their wide wings as they passed over was like a gale.\par
But the Nazg\'fbl turned and fled, and vanished into Mordor's shadows,\par
hearing a sudden terrible call out of the Dark Tower; and even at that moment\par
all the hosts of Mordor trembled, doubt clutched their hearts, their laughter\par
failed, their hands shook and their limbs were loosed. The Power that drove\par
them on and filled them with hate and fury was wavering, its will was removed\par
from them; and now looking in the eyes of their enemies they saw a deadly\par
light and were afraid.\par
Then all the Captains of the West cried aloud, for their hearts were\par
filled with a new hope in the midst of darkness. Out from the beleaguered\par
hills knights of Gondor, Riders of Rohan, D\'fanedain of the North, close-serried\par
companies, drove against their wavering foes, piercing the press with the\par
thrust of bitter spears. But Gandalf lifted up his arms and called once more\par
in a clear voice:\par
'Stand, Men of the West! Stand and wait! This is the hour of doom.'\par
And even as he spoke the earth rocked beneath their feet. Then rising\par
swiftly up, far above the Towers of the Black Gate, high above the mountains,\par
a vast soaring darkness sprang into the sky, flickering with fire. The earth\par
groaned and quaked. The Towers of the Teeth swayed, tottered, and fell down;\par
the mighty rampart crumbled; the Black Gate was hurled in ruin; and from far\par
away, now dim, now growing, now mounting to the clouds, there came a drumming\par
rumble, a roar, a long echoing roll of ruinous noise.\par
'The realm of Sauron is ended!' said Gandalf. 'The Ring-bearer has\par
fulfilled his Quest.' And as the Captains gazed south to the Land of Mordor,\par
it seemed to them that, black against the pall of cloud, there rose a huge\par
shape of shadow, impenetrable, lightning-crowned, filling all the sky.\par
Enormous it reared above the world, and stretched out towards them a vast\par
threatening hand, terrible but impotent: for even as it leaned over them, a\par
great wind took it, and it was all blown away, and passed; and then a hush\par
fell.\par
The Captains bowed their heads; and when they looked up again, behold!\par
their enemies were flying and the power of Mordor was scattering like dust in\par
the wind. As when death smites the swollen brooding thing that inhabits their\par
crawling hill and holds them all in sway, ants will wander witless and\par
purposeless and then feebly die, so the creatures of Sauron, orc or troll or\par
beast spell-enslaved, ran hither and thither mindless; and some slew\par
themselves, or cast themselves in pits, or fled wailing back to hide in holes\par
and dark lightless places far from hope. But the Men of Rh\'fbn and of Harad,\par
Easterling and Southron, saw the ruin of their war and the great majesty and\par
glory of the Captains of the West. And those that were deepest and longest in\par
evil servitude, hating the West, and yet were men proud and bold, in their\par
turn now gathered themselves for a last stand of desperate battle. But the\par
most part fled eastward as they could; and some cast their weapons down and\par
sued for mercy.\par
Then Gandalf, leaving all such matters of battle and command to Aragorn\par
and the other lords, stood upon the hill-top and called; and down to him came\par
the great eagle, Gwaihir the Windlord, and stood before him.\par
'Twice you have borne me, Gwaihir my friend,' said Gandalf. 'Thrice shall\par
pay for all, if you are willing. You will not find me a burden much greater\par
than when you bore me from Zirak-zigil, where my old life burned away.'\par
'I would bear you,' answered Gwaihir, 'whither you will, even were you\par
made of stone.'\par
'Then come, and let your brother go with us, and some other of your folk\par
who is most swift! For we have need of speed greater than any wind,\par
outmatching the wings of the Nazg\'fbl.'\par
'The North Wind blows, but we shall outfly it,' said Gwaihir. And he\par
lifted up Gandalf and sped away south, and with him went Landroval, and\par
Meneldor young and swift. And they passed over Ud\'fbn and Gorgoroth and saw all\par
the land in ruin and tumult beneath them, and before them Mount Doom blazing,\par
pouring out its fire.\par
'I am glad that you are here with me,' said Frodo. 'Here at the end of\par
all things, Sam.'\par
'Yes, I am with you, Master,' said Sam, laying Frodo's wounded hand\par
gently to his breast. 'And you're with me. And the journey's finished. But\par
after coming all that way I don't want to give up yet. It's not like me,\par
somehow, if you understand.'\par
'Maybe not, Sam,' said Frodo; 'but it's like things are in the world.\par
Hopes fail. An end comes. We have only a little time to wait now. We are lost\par
in ruin and downfall, and there is no escape.'\par
'Well, Master, we could at least go further from this dangerous place\par
here, from this Crack of Doom, if that's its name. Now couldn't we? Come, Mr.\par
Frodo, let's go down the path at any rate!'\par
'Very well, Sam. If you wish to go, I'll come,' said Frodo; and they rose\par
and went slowly down the winding road; and even as they passed towards the\par
Mountain's quaking feet, a great smoke and steam belched from the Sammath\par
Naur, and the side of the cone was riven open, and a huge fiery vomit rolled\par
in slow thunderous cascade down the eastern mountain-side.\par
Frodo and Sam could go no further. Their last strength of mind and body\par
was swiftly ebbing. They had reached a low ashen hill piled at the Mountain's\par
foot; but from it there was no more escape. It was an island now, not long to\par
endure, amid the torment of Orodruin. All about it the earth gaped, and from\par
deep rifts and pits smoke and fumes leaped up. Behind them the Mountain was\par
convulsed. Great rents opened in its side. Slow rivers of fire came down the\par
long slopes towards them. Soon they would be engulfed. A rain of hot ash was\par
falling.\par
They stood now; and Sam still holding his master's hand caressed it. He\par
sighed. 'What a tale we have been in, Mr. Frodo, haven't we?' he said. 'I wish\par
I could hear it told! Do you think they'll say: _Now comes the story of Ninefingered\par
Frodo and the Ring of Doom?_And then everyone will hush, like we did,\par
when in Rivendell they told us the tale of Beren One-hand and the Great Jewel.\par
I wish I could hear it! And I wonder how it will go on after our part.'\par
But even while he spoke so, to keep fear away until the very last, his\par
eyes still strayed north, north into the eye of the wind, to where the sky far\par
off was clear, as the cold blast, rising to a gale, drove back the darkness\par
and the ruin of the clouds.\par
And so it was that Gwaihir saw them with his keen far-seeing eyes, as\par
down the wild wind he came, and daring the great peril of the skies he circled\par
in the air: two small dark figures, forlorn, hand in hand upon a little hill,\par
while the world shook under them, and gasped, and rivers of fire drew near.\par
And even as he espied them and came swooping down, he saw them fall, worn out,\par
or choked with fumes and heat, or stricken down by despair at last, hiding\par
their eyes from death.\par
Side by side they lay; and down swept Gwaihir, and down came Landroval\par
and Meneldor the swift; and in a dream, not knowing what fate had befallen\par
them, the wanderers were lifted up and borne far away out of the darkness and\par
the fire.\par
When Sam awoke, he found that he was lying on some soft bed, but over him\par
gently swayed wide beechen boughs, and through their young leaves sunlight\par
glimmered, green and gold. All the air was full of a sweet mingled scent.\par
He remembered that smell: the fragrance of Ithilien. 'Bless me!' he\par
mused. 'How long have I been asleep?' For the scent had borne him back to the\par
day when he had lit his little fire under the sunny bank; and for a moment all\par
else between was out of waking memory. He stretched and drew a deep breath.\par
'Why, what a dream I've had!' he muttered. 'I am glad to wake!' He sat up and\par
then he saw that Frodo was lying beside him, and slept peacefully, one hand\par
behind his head, and the other resting upon the coverlet. It was the right\par
hand, and the third finger was missing.\par
Full memory flooded back, and Sam cried aloud: 'It wasn't a dream! Then\par
where are we?'\par
And a voice spoke softly behind: 'In the land of Ithilien, and in the\par
keeping of the King; and he awaits you.' With that Gandalf stood before him,\par
robed in white, his beard now gleaming like pure snow in the twinkling of the\par
leafy sunlight. 'Well, Master Samwise, how do you feel?' he said.\par
But Sam lay back, and stared with open mouth, and for a moment, between\par
bewilderment and great joy, he could not answer. At last he gasped: 'Gandalf!\par
I thought you were dead! But then I thought I was dead myself. Is everything\par
sad going to come untrue? What's happened to the world?'\par
'A great Shadow has departed,' said Gandalf, and then he laughed and the\par
sound was like music, or like water in a parched land; and as he listened the\par
thought came to Sam that he had not heard laughter, the pure sound of\par
merriment, for days upon days without count. It fell upon his ears like the\par
echo of all the joys he had ever known. But he himself burst into tears. Then,\par
as a sweet rain will pass down a wind of spring and the sun will shine out the\par
clearer, his tears ceased, and his laughter welled up, and laughing he sprang\par
from his bed.\par
'How do I feel?' he cried. 'Well, I don't know how to say it. I feel, I\par
feel' \endash  he waved his arms in the air \endash  'I feel like spring after winter, and\par
sun on the leaves; and like trumpets and harps and all the songs I have ever\par
heard!' He stopped and he turned towards his master. 'But how's Mr. Frodo?' he\par
said. 'Isn't it a shame about his poor hand? But I hope he's all right\par
otherwise. He's had a cruel time.'\par
'Yes, I am all right otherwise,' said Frodo, sitting up and laughing in\par
his turn. I fell asleep again waiting for you, Sam, you sleepyhead. I was\par
awake early this morning, and now it must be nearly noon.'\par
'Noon?' said Sam, trying to calculate. 'Noon of what day?'\par
'The fourteenth of the New Year,' said Gandalf; 'or if you like, the\par
eighth day of April in the Shire reckoning. But in Gondor the New Year will\par
always now begin upon the twenty-fifth of March when Sauron fell, and when you\par
were brought out of the fire to the King. He has tended you, and now he awaits\par
you. You shall eat and drink with him. When you are ready I will lead you to\par
him.'\par
'The King?' said Sam. 'What king, and who is he?'\par
'The King of Gondor and Lord of the Western Lands,' said Gandalf 'and he\par
has taken back all his ancient realm. He will ride soon to his crowning, but\par
he waits for you.'\par
'What shall we wear?' said Sam; for all he could see was the old and\par
tattered clothes that they had journeyed in, lying folded on the ground beside\par
their beds.\par
'The clothes that you wore on your way to Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'Even\par
the orc-rags that you bore in the black land; Frodo, shall be preserved. No\par
silks and linens, nor any armour or heraldry could be more honourable. But\par
later I will find some other clothes, perhaps.'\par
Then he held out his hands to them, and they saw that one shone with\par
light. 'What have you got there?' Frodo cried. 'Can it be \endash  ?'\par
'Yes, I have brought your two treasures. They were found on Sam when you\par
were rescued. The Lady Galadriel's gifts: your glass, Frodo, and your box,\par
Sam. You will be glad to have these safe again.'\par
When they were washed and clad, and had eaten a light meal, the Hobbits\par
followed Gandalf. They stepped out of the beech-grove in which they had lain,\par
and passed on to a long green lawn, glowing in sunshine, bordered by stately\par
dark-leaved trees laden with scarlet blossom. Behind them they could hear the\par
sound of falling water, and a stream ran down before them between flowering\par
banks, until it came to a greenwood at the lawn's foot and passed then on\par
under an archway of trees, through which they saw the shimmer of water far\par
away.\par
As they came to the opening in the wood, they were surprised to see\par
knights in bright mail and tall guards in silver and black standing there, who\par
greeted them with honour and bowed before them. And then one blew a long\par
trumpet, and they went on through the aisle of trees beside the singing\par
stream. So they came to a wide green land, and beyond it was a broad river in\par
a silver haze, out of which rose a long wooded isle, and many ships lay by its\par
shores. But on the field where they now stood a great host was drawn up, in\par
ranks and companies glittering in the sun. And as the Hobbits approached\par
swords were unsheathed, and spears were shaken, and horns and trumpets sang,\par
and men cried with many voices and in many tongues:\par
_'Long live the Halflings! Praise them with great praise!\par
Cuio i Pheriain anann! Aglar'ni Pheriannath!\par
Praise them with great praise, Frodo and Samwise!\par
Daur a Berhael, Conin en Ann\'fbn! Eglerio!\par
Praise them!\par
Eglerio!\par
A laita te, laita te! Andave laituvalmet!\par
Praise them!\par
Cormacolindor, a laita t\'e1rienna!\par
Praise them! The Ring-bearers, praise them with great praise!'_\par
And so the red blood blushing in their faces and their eyes shining with\par
wonder, Frodo and Sam went forward and saw that amidst the clamorous host were\par
set three high-seats built of green turves. Behind the seat upon the right\par
floated, white on green, a great horse running free; upon the left was a\par
banner, silver upon blue, a ship swan-prowed faring on the sea; but behind the\par
highest throne in the midst of all a great standard was spread in the breeze,\par
and there a white tree flowered upon a sable field beneath a shining crown and\par
seven glittering stars. On the throne sat a mail-clad man, a great sword was\par
laid across his knees, but he wore no helm. As they drew near he rose. And\par
then they knew him, changed as he was, so high and glad of face, kingly, lord\par
of Men, dark-haired with eyes of grey.\par
Frodo ran to meet him, and Sam followed close behind. 'Well, if that\par
isn't the crown of all!' he said. 'Strider, or I'm still asleep!'\par
'Yes, Sam, Strider,' said Aragorn. 'It is a long way, is it not, from\par
Bree, where you did not like the look of me? A long way for us all but yours\par
has been the darkest road.'\par
And then to Sam's surprise and utter confusion he bowed his knee before\par
them; and taking them by the hand, Frodo upon his right and Sam upon his left,\par
he led them to the throne, and setting them upon it, he turned to the men and\par
captains who stood by and spoke, so that his voice rang over all the host,\par
crying:\par
'Praise them with great praise!'\par
And when the glad shout had swelled up and died away again, to Sam's\par
final and complete satisfaction and pure joy, a minstrel of Gondor stood\par
forth, and knelt, and begged leave to sing. And behold! he said:\par
'Lo! lords and knights and men of valour unashamed, kings and princes,\par
and fair people of Gondor, and Riders of Rohan, and ye sons of Elrond, and\par
D\'fanedain of the North, and Elf and Dwarf, and greathearts of the Shire, and\par
all free folk of the West, now listen to my lay. For I will sing to you of\par
Frodo of the Nine Fingers and the Ring of Doom.'\par
And when Sam heard that he laughed aloud for sheer delight, and he stood\par
up and cried: 'O great glory and splendour! And all my wishes have come\par
true!' And then he wept.\par
And all the host laughed and wept, and in the midst of their merriment\par
and tears the clear voice of the minstrel rose like silver and gold, and all\par
men were hushed. And he sang to them, now in the Elven-tongue, now in the\par
speech of the West, until their hearts, wounded with sweet words, overflowed,\par
and their joy was like swords, and they passed in thought out to regions where\par
pain and delight flow together and tears are the very wine of blessedness.\par
And at the last, as the Sun fell from the noon and the shadows of the\par
trees lengthened, he ended. 'Praise them with great praise!' he said and\par
knelt. And then Aragorn stood up, and all the host arose, and they passed to\par
pavilions made ready, to eat and drink and make merry while the day lasted.\par
Frodo and Sam were led apart and brought to a tent, and there their old\par
raiment was taken off, but folded and set aside with honour; and clean linen\par
was given to them. Then Gandalf came and in his arms, to the wonder of Frodo,\par
he bore the sword and the elven-cloak and the mithril-coat that had been taken\par
from him in Mordor. For Sam he brought a coat of gilded mail, and his elvencloak\par
all healed of the soils and hurts that it had suffered; and then he laid\par
before them two swords.\par
'I do not wish for any sword,' said Frodo.\par
'Tonight at least you should wear one,' said Gandalf.\par
Then Frodo took the small sword that had belonged to Sam, and had been\par
laid at his side in Cirith Ungol. 'Sting I gave to you Sam,' he said.\par
'No, master! Mr. Bilbo gave it to you, and it goes with his silver coat;\par
he would not wish anyone else to wear it now.'\par
Frodo gave way; and Gandalf, as if he were their esquire, knelt and girt\par
the sword-belts about them, and then rising he set circlets of silver upon\par
their heads. And when they were arrayed they went to the great feast; and they\par
sat at the King's table with Gandalf, and King \'c9omer of Rohan, and the Prince\par
Imrahil and all the chief captains; and there also were Gimli and Legolas.\par
But when, after the Standing Silence, wine was brought there came in two\par
esquires to serve the kings; or so they seemed to be: one was clad in the\par
silver and sable of the Guards of Minas Tirith, and the other in white and\par
green. But Sam wondered what such young boys were doing in an army of mighty\par
men. Then suddenly as they drew near and he could see them plainly, he\par
exclaimed:\par
'Why, look Mr. Frodo! Look here! Well, if it isn't Pippin. Mr. Peregrin\par
Took I should say, and Mr. Merry! How they have grown! Bless me! But I can see\par
there's more tales to tell than ours.'\par
'There are indeed,' said Pippin turning towards him. 'And we'll begin\par
telling them, as soon as this feast is ended. In the meantime you can try\par
Gandalf. He's not so close as he used to be, though he laughs now more than he\par
talks. For the present Merry and I are busy. We are knights of the City and of\par
the Mark, as I hope you observe.'\par
At last the glad day ended; and when the Sun was gone and the round Moon\par
rode slowly above the mists of Anduin and flickered through the fluttering\par
leaves, Frodo and Sam sat under the whispering trees amid the fragrance of\par
fair Ithilien; and they talked deep into the night with Merry and Pippin and\par
Gandalf, and after a while Legolas and Gimli joined them. There Frodo and Sam\par
learned much of all that had happened to the Company after their fellowship\par
was broken on the evil day at Parth Galen by Rauros Falls; and still there was\par
always more to ask and more to tell.\par
Orcs, and talking trees, and leagues of grass, and galloping riders. and\par
glittering caves, and white towers and golden halls, and battles, and tall\par
ships sailing, all these passed before Sam's mind until he felt bewildered.\par
But amidst all these wonders he returned always to his astonishment at the\par
size of Merry and Pippin; and he made them stand back to back with Frodo and\par
himself. He scratched his head. 'Can't understand it at your age!' he said.\par
'But there it is: you're three inches taller than you ought to he, or I'm a\par
dwarf.'\par
'That you certainly are not,' said Gimli. 'But what did I say? Mortals\par
cannot go drinking ent-draughts and expect no more to come of them than of a\par
pot of beer.'\par
'Ent-draughts?' said Sam. 'There you go about Ents again; but what they\par
are beats me. Why, it will take weeks before we get all these things sized\par
up!'\par
'Weeks indeed,' said Pippin. 'And then Frodo will have to be locked up in\par
a tower in Minas Tirith and write it all down. Otherwise he will forget half\par
of it, and poor old Bilbo will be dreadfully disappointed.'\par
At length Gandalf rose. 'The hands of the King are hands of healing, dear\par
friends,' he said. 'But you went to the very brink of death ere he recalled\par
you, putting forth all his power, and sent you into the sweet forgetfulness of\par
sleep. And though you have indeed slept long and blessedly, still it is now\par
time to sleep again.'\par
And not only Sam and Frodo here, said Gimli, but you too, Pippin. I love\par
you, if only because of the pains you have cost me, which I shall never\par
forget. Nor shall I forget finding you on the hill of the last battle. But for\par
Gimli the Dwarf you would have been lost then. But at least I know now the\par
look of a hobbit's foot, though it be all that can be seen under a heap of\par
bodies. And when I heaved that great carcase off you, I made sure you were\par
dead. I could have. torn out my beard. And it is only a day yet since you were\par
first up and abroad again. To bed now you go. And so shall I.'\par
'And I,' said Legolas, 'shall walk in the woods of this fair land, which\par
is rest enough. In days to come, if my Elven-lord allows, some of our folk\par
shall remove hither; and when we come it shall be blessed, for a while. For a\par
while: a month, a life, a hundred years of Men. But Anduin is near, and Anduin\par
leads down to the Sea. To the Sea!\par
_To the Sea, to the Sea! The white gulls are crying,\par
The wind is blowing, and the white foam is flying.\par
West, west away, the round sun is falling.\par
Grey ship, grey ship, do you hear them calling.\par
The voices of my people that have gone before me?\par
I will leave, I will leave the woods that bore me;\par
For our days are ending and our years failing.\par
I will pass the wide waters lonely sailing.\par
Long are the waves on the Last Shore falling,\par
Sweet are the voices in the Lost Isle calling,\par
In Eress\'eba, in Elvenhome that no man can discover,\par
Where the leaves fall not: land of my people for ever!'_\par
And so singing Legolas went away down the hill.\par
Then the others also departed, and Frodo and Sam went to their beds and\par
slept. And in the morning they rose again in hope and peace; and they spent\par
many days in Ithilien. For the Field of Cormallen, where the host was now\par
encamped was near to Henneth Ann\'fbn, and the stream that flowed from its falls\par
could be heard in the night as it rushed down through its rocky gate, and\par
passed through the flowery meads into the tides of Anduin by the Isle of Cair\par
Andros. The hobbits wandered here and there visiting again the places that\par
they had passed before; and Sam hoped always in some shadow of the woods or\par
secret glade to catch, maybe, a glimpse of the great Oliphaunt. And when he\par
learned that at the siege of Gondor there had been a great number of these\par
beasts but that they were all destroyed, he thought it a sad loss.\par
'Well, one can't be everywhere at once, I suppose,' he said. 'But I\par
missed a lot, seemingly.'\par
In the meanwhile the host made ready for the return to Minas Tirith. The\par
weary rested and the hurt were healed. For some had laboured and fought much\par
with the remnants of the Easterlings and Southrons, until all were subdued.\par
And, latest of all, those returned who had passed into Mordor and destroyed\par
the fortresses in the north of the land.\par
But at the last when the month of May was drawing near the Captains of\par
the West set out again; and they went aboard ship with all their men, and they\par
sailed from Cair Andros down Anduin to Osgiliath; and there they remained for\par
one day; and the day after they came to the green fields of the Pelennor and\par
saw again the white towers under tall Mindolluin, the City of the Men of\par
Gondor, last memory of Westernesse, that had passed through the darkness and\par
fire to a new day.\par
And there in the midst of the fields they set up their pavilions and\par
awaited the morning; for it was the Eve of May, and the King would enter his\par
gates with the rising of the Sun.\par
_Chapter 5_\par
The Steward and the King\par
Over the city of Gondor doubt and great dread had hung. Fair weather and\par
clear sun had seemed but a mockery to men whose days held little hope, and who\par
looked each morning for news of doom. Their lord was dead and burned, dead lay\par
the King of Rohan in their citadel, and the new king that had come to them in\par
the night was gone again to a war with powers too dark and terrible for any\par
might or valour to conquer. And no news came. After the host left Morgul Vale\par
and took the northward road beneath the shadow of the mountains no messenger\par
had returned nor any rumour of what was passing in the brooding East.\par
When the Captains were but two days gone, the Lady \'c9owyn bade the women\par
who tended her to bring her raiment, and she would not be gainsaid, but rose;\par
and when they had clothed her and set her arm in a sling of linen, she went to\par
the Warden of the Houses of Healing.\par
'Sir,' she said, 'I am in great unrest, and I cannot lie longer in\par
sloth.'\par
'Lady,' he answered, 'you are not yet healed, and I was commanded to tend\par
you with especial care. You should not have risen from your bed for seven days\par
yet, or so I was bidden. I beg you to go back.'\par
'I am healed,' she said, 'healed at least in body, save my left arm only,\par
and that is at ease. But I shall sicken anew, if there is naught that I can\par
do. Are there no tidings of war? The women can tell me nothing.'\par
'There are no tidings,' said the Warden, 'save that the Lords have ridden\par
to Morgul Vale; and men say that the new captain out of the North is their\par
chief. A great lord is that, and a healer; and it is a thing passing strange\par
to me that the healing hand should also wield the sword. It is not thus in\par
Gondor now, though once it was so, if old tales be true. But for long years we\par
healers have only sought to patch the rents made by the men of swords. Though\par
we should still have enough to do without them: the world is full enough of\par
hurts and mischances without wars to multiply them.'\par
It needs but one foe to breed a war, not two, Master Warden, answered\par
\'c9owyn. 'And those who have not swords can still die upon them. Would you have\par
the folk of Gondor gather you herbs only, when the Dark Lord gathers armies?\par
And it is not always good to be healed in body. Nor is it always evil to die\par
in battle, even in bitter pain. Were I permitted, in this dark hour I would\par
choose the latter.'\par
The Warden looked at her. Tall she stood there, her eyes bright in her\par
white face, her hand clenched as she turned and gazed out of his window that\par
opened to the East. He sighed and shook his head. After a pause she turned to\par
him again.\par
'Is there no deed to do?' she said. 'Who commands in this City?'\par
'I do not rightly know,' he answered. 'Such things are not my care. There\par
is a marshal over the Riders of Rohan; and the Lord H\'farin, I am told, commands\par
the men of Gondor. But the Lord Faramir is by right the Steward of the City.'\par
'Where can I find him?'\par
'In this house, lady. He was sorely hurt, but is now set again on the way\par
to health. But I do not know-'\par
'Will you not bring me to him? Then you will know.'\par
The Lord Faramir was walking alone in the garden of the Houses of\par
Healing, and the sunlight warmed him, and he felt life run new in his veins;\par
but his heart was heavy, and he looked out over the walls eastward. And\par
coming, the Warden spoke his name, and he turned and saw the Lady \'c9owyn of\par
Rohan; and he was moved with pity, for he saw that she was hurt, and his clear\par
sight perceived her sorrow and unrest.\par
'My lord,' said the Warden, 'here is the Lady \'c9owyn of Rohan. She rode\par
with the king and was sorely hurt, and dwells now in my keeping. But she is\par
not content, and she wishes to speak to the Steward of the City.'\par
'Do not misunderstand him, lord,' said \'c9owyn. 'It is not lack of care\par
that grieves me. No houses could be fairer, for those who desire to be healed.\par
But I cannot lie in sloth, idle, caged. I looked for death in battle. But I\par
have not died, and battle still goes on.'\par
At a sign from Faramir, the Warden bowed and departed. 'What would you\par
have me do, lady?' said Faramir. 'I also am a prisoner of the healers.' He\par
looked at her, and being a man whom pity deeply stirred, it seemed to him that\par
her loveliness amid her grief would pierce his heart. And she looked at him\par
and saw the grave tenderness in his eyes, and yet knew, for she was bred among\par
men of war, that here was one whom no Rider of the Mark would outmatch in\par
battle.\par
'What do you wish?' he said again. 'If it lies in my power, I will do\par
it.'\par
'I would have you command this Warden, and bid him let me go,' she said;\par
but though her words were still proud, her heart faltered, and for the first\par
time she doubted herself. She guessed that this tall man, both stern and\par
gentle, might think her merely wayward, like a child that has not the firmness\par
of mind to go on with a dull task to the end.\par
'I myself am in the Warden's keeping,' answered Faramir. 'Nor have I yet\par
taken up my authority in the City. But had I done so, I should still listen to\par
his counsel, and should not cross his will in matters of his craft, unless in\par
some great need.'\par
'But I do not desire healing,' she said. 'I wish to ride to war like my\par
brother \'c9omer, or better like Th\'e9oden the king, for he died and has both\par
honour and peace.'\par
'It is too late, lady, to follow the Captains, even if you had the\par
strength,' said Faramir. 'But death in battle may come to us all yet, willing\par
or unwilling. You will be better prepared to face it in your own manner, if\par
while there is still time you do as the Healer commanded. You and I, we must\par
endure with patience the hours of waiting.'\par
She did not answer, but as he looked at her it seemed to him that\par
something in her softened, as though a bitter frost were yielding at the first\par
faint presage of Spring. A tear sprang in her eye and fell down her cheek,\par
like a glistening rain-drop. Her proud head drooped a little. Then quietly,\par
more as if speaking to herself than to him: 'But the healers would have me lie\par
abed seven days yet,' she said. 'And my window does not look eastward.' Her\par
voice was now that of a maiden young and sad.\par
Faramir smiled, though his heart was filled with pity. 'Your window does\par
not look eastward?' he said. 'That can be amended. In this I will command the\par
Warden. If you will stay in this house in our care, lady, and take your rest,\par
then you shall walk in this garden in the sun, as you will; and you shall look\par
east, whither all our hopes have gone. And here you will find me, walking and\par
waiting, and also looking east. It would ease my care, if you would speak to\par
me, or walk at whiles with me.'\par
Then she raised her head and looked him in the eyes again; and a colour\par
came in her pale face. 'How should I ease your care, my lord?' she said. 'And\par
I do not desire the speech of living men.'\par
'Would you have my plain answer?' he said.\par
'I would.'\par
'Then, \'c9owyn of Rohan, I say to you that you are beautiful. In the\par
valleys of our hills there are flowers fair and bright, and maidens fairer\par
still; but neither flower nor lady have I seen till now in Gondor so lovely,\par
and so sorrowful. It may be that only a few days are left ere darkness falls\par
upon our world, and when it comes I hope to face it steadily; but it would\par
ease my heart, if while the Sun yet shines, I could see you still. For you and\par
I have both passed under the wings of the Shadow, and the same hand drew us\par
back.'\par
'Alas, not me, lord!' she said. 'Shadow lies on me still. Look not to me\par
for healing! I am a shieldmaiden and my hand is ungentle. But I thank you for\par
this at least, that I need not keep to my chamber. I will walk abroad by the\par
grace of the Steward of the City.' And she did him a courtesy and walked back\par
to the house. But Faramir for a long while walked alone in the garden, and his\par
glance now strayed rather to the house than to the eastward walls.\par
When he returned to his chamber he called for the Warden, and heard all\par
that he could tell of the Lady of Rohan.\par
'But I doubt not, lord,' said the Warden, 'that you would learn more from\par
the Halfling that is with us; for he was in the riding of the king, and with\par
the Lady at the end, they say.'\par
And so Merry was sent to Faramir, and while that day lasted they talked\par
long together, and Faramir learned much, more even than Merry put into words;\par
and he thought that he understood now something of the grief and unrest of\par
\'c9owyn of Rohan. And in the fair evening Faramir and Merry walked in the\par
garden, but she did not come.\par
But in the morning, as Faramir came from the Houses, he saw her, as she\par
stood upon the walls; and she was clad all in white, and gleamed in the sun.\par
And he called to her, and she came down, and they walked on the grass or sat\par
under a green tree together, now in silence, now in speech. And each day after\par
they did likewise. And the Warden looking from his window was glad in heart.\par
for he was a healer. and his care was lightened; and certain it was that,\par
heavy as was the dread and foreboding of those days upon the hearts of men,\par
still these two of his charges prospered and grew daily in strength.\par
And so the fifth day came since the Lady \'c9owyn went first to Faramir; and\par
they stood now together once more upon the walls of the City and looked out.\par
No tidings had yet come, and all hearts were darkened. The weather, too, was\par
bright no longer. It was cold. A wind that had sprung up in the night was\par
blowing now keenly from the North, and it was rising; but the lands about\par
looked grey and drear.\par
They were clad in warm raiment and heavy cloaks, and over all the Lady\par
\'c9owyn wore a great blue mantle of the colour of deep summer-night, and it was\par
set with silver stars about hem and throat. Faramir had sent for this robe and\par
had wrapped it about her; and he thought that she looked fair and queenly\par
indeed as she stood there at his side. The mantle was wrought for his mother,\par
Finduilas of Amroth, who died untimely, and was to him but a memory of\par
loveliness in far days and of his first grief; and her robe seemed to him\par
raiment fitting for the beauty and sadness of \'c9owyn.\par
But she now shivered beneath the starry mantle, and she looked northward,\par
above the grey hither lands, into the eye of the cold wind where far away the\par
sky was hard and clear.\par
'What do you look for, \'c9owyn?' said Faramir.\par
'Does not the Black Gate lie yonder?' said she. 'And must he not now be\par
come thither? It is seven days since he rode away.'\par
'Seven days,' said Faramir. 'But think not ill of me, if I say to you:\par
they have brought me both a joy and a pain that I never thought to know. Joy\par
to see you; but pain, because now the fear and doubt of this evil time are\par
grown dark indeed. \'c9owyn, I would not have this world end now, or lose so soon\par
what I have found.'\par
'Lose what you have found, lord?' she answered; but she looked at him\par
gravely and her eyes were kind. 'I know not what in these days you have found\par
that you could lose. But come, my friend, let us not speak of it! Let us not\par
speak at all! I stand upon some dreadful brink, and it is utterly dark in the\par
abyss before my feet, but whether there is any light behind me I cannot tell.\par
For I cannot turn yet. I wait for some stroke of doom.'\par
'Yes, we wait for the stroke of doom,' said Faramir. And they said no\par
more; and it seemed to them as they stood upon the wall that the wind died,\par
and the light failed, and the Sun was bleared, and all sounds in the City or\par
in the lands about were hushed: neither wind, nor voice, nor bird-call, nor\par
rustle of leaf, nor their own breath could be heard; the very beating of their\par
hearts was stilled. Time halted.\par
And as they stood so, their hands met and clasped, though they did not\par
know it. And still they waited for they knew not what. Then presently it\par
seemed to them that above the ridges of the distant mountains another vast\par
mountain of darkness rose, towering up like a wave that should engulf the\par
world, and about it lightnings flickered; and then a tremor ran through the\par
earth, and they felt the walls of the City quiver. A sound like a sigh went up\par
from all the lands about them; and their hearts beat suddenly again.\par
'It reminds me of N\'famenor,' said Faramir, and wondered to hear himself\par
speak.\par
'Of N\'famenor?' said \'c9owyn.\par
'Yes,' said Faramir, 'of the land of Westernesse that foundered and of\par
the great dark wave climbing over the green lands and above the hills, and\par
coming on, darkness unescapable. I often dream of it.'\par
'Then you think that the Darkness is coming?' said \'c9owyn. 'Darkness\par
Unescapable?' And suddenly she drew close to him.\par
'No,' said Faramir, looking into her face. 'It was but a picture in the\par
mind. I do not know what is happening. The reason of my waking mind tells me\par
that great evil has befallen and we stand at the end of days. But my heart\par
says nay; and all my limbs are light, and a hope and joy are come to me that\par
no reason can deny. \'c9owyn, \'c9owyn, White Lady of Rohan, in this hour I do not\par
believe that any darkness will endure!' And he stooped and kissed her brow.\par
And so they stood on the walls of the City of Gondor, and a great wind\par
rose and blew, and their hair, raven and golden, streamed out mingling in the\par
air. And the Shadow departed, and the Sun was unveiled, and light leaped\par
forth; and the waters of Anduin shone like silver, and in all the houses of\par
the City men sang for the joy that welled up in their hearts from what source\par
they could not tell.\par
And before the Sun had fallen far from the noon out of the East there\par
came a great Eagle flying, and he bore tidings beyond hope from the Lords of\par
the West, crying:\par
_Sing now, ye people of the Tower of Anor,\par
for the Realm of Sauron is ended for ever,\par
and the Dark Tower is thrown down.\par
Sing and rejoice, ye people of the Tower of Guard,\par
for your watch hath not been in vain,\par
and the Black Gate is broken,\par
and your King hath passed through,\par
and he is victorious.\par
Sing and be glad, all ye children of the West,\par
for your King shall come again,\par
and he shall dwell among you\par
all the days of your life.\par
And the Tree that was withered shall be renewed,\par
and he shall plant it in the high places,\par
and the City shall be blessed.\par
Sing all ye people!_\par
And the people sang in all the ways of the City.\par
The days that followed were golden, and Spring and Summer joined and made\par
revel together in the fields of Gondor. And tidings now came by swift riders\par
from Cair Andros of all that was done, and the City made ready for the coming\par
of the King. Merry was summoned and rode away with the wains that took store\par
of goods to Osgiliath and thence by ship to Cair Andros; but Faramir did not\par
go, for now being healed he took upon him his authority and the Stewardship,\par
although it was only for a little while, and his duty was to prepare for one\par
who should replace him.\par
And \'c9owyn did not go, though her brother sent word begging her to come to\par
the field of Cormallen. And Faramir wondered at this, but he saw her seldom,\par
being busy with many matters; and she dwelt still in the Houses of Healing and\par
walked alone in the garden, and her face grew pale again, and it seemed that\par
in all the City she only was ailing and sorrowful. And the Warden of the\par
Houses was troubled, and he spoke to Faramir.\par
Then Faramir came and sought her, and once more they stood on the walls\par
together; and he said to her: '\'c9owyn, why do you tarry here, and do not go to\par
the rejoicing in Cormallen beyond Cair Andros, where your brother awaits you?'\par
And she said: 'Do you not know?'\par
But he answered: 'Two reasons there may be, but which is true, I do not\par
know.'\par
And she said: 'I do not wish to play at riddles. Speak plainer!'\par
'Then if you will have it so, lady,' he said: 'you do not go, because\par
only your brother called for you, and to look on the Lord Aragorn, Elendil's\par
heir, in his triumph would now bring you no joy. Or because I do not go, and\par
you desire still to be near me. And maybe for both these reasons, and you\par
yourself cannot choose between them. \'c9owyn, do you not love me, or will you\par
not?'\par
'I wished to be loved by another,' she answered. 'But I desire no man's\par
pity.'\par
'That I know,' he said. 'You desired to have the love of the Lord\par
Aragorn. Because he was high and puissant, and you wished to have renown and\par
glory and to be lifted far above the mean things that crawl on the earth. And\par
as a great captain may to a young soldier he seemed to you admirable. For so\par
he is, a lord among men, the greatest that now is. But when he gave you only\par
understanding and pity, then you desired to have nothing, unless a brave death\par
in battle. Look at me, \'c9owyn!'\par
And \'c9owyn looked at Faramir long and steadily; and Faramir said: 'Do not\par
scorn pity that is the gift of a gentle heart, \'c9owyn! But I do not offer you\par
my pity. For you are a lady high and valiant and have yourself won renown that\par
shall not be forgotten; and you are a lady beautiful, I deem, beyond even the\par
words of the Elven-tongue to tell. And I love you. Once I pitied your sorrow.\par
But now, were you sorrowless, without fear or any lack, were you the blissful\par
Queen of Gondor, still I would love you. \'c9owyn, do you not love me?'\par
Then the heart of \'c9owyn changed, or else at last she understood it. And\par
suddenly her winter passed, and the sun shone on her.\par
I stand in Minas Anor, the Tower of the Sun, she said; and behold the\par
Shadow has departed! I will be a shieldmaiden no longer, nor vie with the\par
great Riders, nor take joy only in the songs of slaying. I will be a healer,\par
and love all things that grow and are not barren.' And again she looked at\par
Faramir. 'No longer do I desire to be a queen,' she said.\par
Then Faramir laughed merrily. 'That is well,' he said; 'for I am not a\par
king. Yet I will wed with the White Lady of Rohan, if it be her will. And if\par
she will, then let us cross the River and in happier days let us dwell in fair\par
Ithilien and there make a garden. All things will grow with joy there, if the\par
White Lady comes.'\par
'Then must I leave my own people, man of Gondor?' she said. 'And would\par
you have your proud folk say of you: There goes a lord who tamed a wild\par
shieldmaiden of the North! Was there no woman of the race of N\'famenor to\par
choose?'\par
'I would,' said Faramir. And he took her in his arms and kissed her under\par
the sunlit sky, and he cared not that they stood high upon the walls in the\par
sight of many. And many indeed saw them and the light that shone about them as\par
they came down from the walls and went hand in hand to the Houses of Healing.\par
And to the Warden of the Houses Faramir said: 'Here is the Lady \'c9owyn of\par
Rohan, and now she is healed.'\par
And the Warden said: 'Then I release her from my charge and bid her\par
farewell, and may she suffer never hurt nor sickness again. I commend her to\par
the care of the Steward of the City, until her brother returns.'\par
But \'c9owyn said: 'Yet now that I have leave to depart, I would remain. For\par
this House has become to me of all dwellings the most blessed.' And she\par
remained there until King \'c9omer came.\par
All things were now made ready in the City; and there was great concourse\par
of people, for the tidings had gone out into all parts of Gondor, from Min-\par
Rimmon even to Pinnath Gelin and the far coasts of the sea; and all that could\par
come to the City made haste to come. And the City was filled again with women\par
and fair children that returned to their homes laden with flowers; and from\par
Dol Amroth came the harpers that harped most skilfully in all the land; and\par
there were players upon viols and upon flutes and upon horns of silver, and\par
clear-voiced singers from the vales of Lebennin.\par
At last an evening came when from the walls the pavilions could be seen\par
upon the field, and all night lights were burning as men watched for the dawn.\par
And when the sun rose in the clear morning above the mountains in the East,\par
upon which shadows lay no more, then all the bells rang, and all the banners\par
broke and flowed in the wind; and upon the White Tower of the citadel the\par
standard of the Stewards, bright argent like snow in the sun, bearing no\par
charge nor device, was raised over Gondor for the last time.\par
Now the Captains of the West led their host towards the City, and folk\par
saw them advance in line upon line, flashing and glinting in the sunrise and\par
rippling like silver. And so they came before the Gateway and halted a furlong\par
from the walls. As yet no gates had been set up again, but a barrier was laid\par
across the entrance to the City, and there stood men at arms in silver and\par
black with long swords drawn. Before the barrier stood Faramir the Steward,\par
and H\'farin Warden of the Keys, and other captains of Gondor, and the Lady \'c9owyn\par
of Rohan with Elfhelm the Marshal and many knights of the Mark; and upon\par
either side of the Gate was a great press of fair people in raiment of many\par
colours and garlands of flowers.\par
So now there was a wide space before the walls of Minas Tirith, and it\par
was hemmed in upon all sides by the knights and the soldiers of Gondor and of\par
Rohan, and by the people of the City and of all parts of the land. A hush fell\par
upon all as out from the host stepped the D\'fanedain in silver and grey; and\par
before them came walking slow the Lord Aragorn. He was clad in black mail girt\par
with silver, and he wore a long mantle of pure white clasped at the throat\par
with a great jewel of green that shone from afar; but his head was bare save\par
for a star upon his forehead bound by a slender fillet of silver. With him\par
were \'c9omer of Rohan, and the Prince Imrahil, and Gandalf robed all in white,\par
and four small figures that many men marvelled to see.\par
'Nay, cousin! they are not boys,' said Ioreth to her kinswoman from\par
Imloth Melui, who stood beside her. 'Those are _Periain_, out of the far\par
country of the Halflings, where they are princes of great fame, it is said. I\par
should know, for I had one to tend in the Houses. They are small, but they are\par
valiant. Why, cousin, one of them went with only his esquire into the Black\par
Country and fought with the Dark Lord all by himself, and set fire to his\par
Tower, if you can believe it. At least that is the tale in the City. That will\par
be the one that walks with our Elfstone. They are dear friends, I hear. Now he\par
is a marvel, the Lord Elfstone: not too soft in his speech, mind you, but he\par
has a golden heart, as the saying is; and he has the healing hands. The hands\par
of the king are the hands of a healer, I said; and that was how it was all\par
discovered. And Mithrandir, he said to me: Ioreth, men will long remember your\par
words, and-'\par
But Ioreth was not permitted to continue the instruction of her kinswoman\par
from the country, for a single trumpet rang, and a dead silence followed. Then\par
forth from the Gate went Faramir with H\'farin of the Keys, and no others, save\par
that behind them walked four men in the high helms and armour of the Citadel,\par
and they bore a great casket of black _lebethron_ bound with silver.\par
Faramir met Aragorn in the midst of those there assembled, and he knelt,\par
and said: 'The last Steward of Gondor begs leave to surrender his office.' And\par
he held out a white rod; but Aragorn took the rod and gave it back, saying:\par
'That office is not ended, and it shall be thine and thy heirs' as long as my\par
line shall last. Do now thy office!'\par
Then Faramir stood up and spoke in a clear voice: 'Men of Gondor hear now\par
the Steward of this Realm! Behold! one has come to claim the kingship again at\par
last. Here is Aragorn son of Arathorn, chieftain of the D\'fanedain of Arnor,\par
Captain of the Host of the West, bearer of the Star of the North, wielder of\par
the Sword Reforged, victorious in battle, whose hands bring healing, the\par
Elfstone, Elessar of the line of Valandil, Isildur's son, Elendil's son of\par
N\'famenor. Shall he be king and enter into the City and dwell there?'\par
And all the host and all the people cried _yea_ with one voice.\par
And Ioreth said to her kinswoman: 'This is just a ceremony such as we\par
have in the City, cousin; for he has already entered, as I was telling you;\par
and he said to me-' And then again she was obliged to silence, for Faramir\par
spoke again.\par
'Men of Gondor, the loremasters tell that it was the custom of old that\par
the king should receive the crown from his father ere he died; or if that\par
might not be, that he should go alone and take it from the hands of his father\par
in the tomb where he was laid. But since things must now be done otherwise,\par
using the authority of the Steward, I have today brought hither from Rath\par
D\'ednen the crown of E\'e4rnur the last king, whose days passed in the time of our\par
longfathers of old.'\par
Then the guards stepped forward, and Faramir opened the casket, and he\par
held up an ancient crown. It was shaped like the helms of the Guards of the\par
Citadel, save that it was loftier, and it was all white, and the wings at\par
either side were wrought of pearl and silver in the likeness of the wings of a\par
sea-bird, for it was the emblem of kings who came over the Sea; and seven gems\par
of adamant were set in the circlet, and upon its summit was set a single jewel\par
the light of which went up like a flame.\par
Then Aragorn took the crown and held it up and said:\par
_Et E\'e4rello Endorenna ut\'falien. Sinome maruvan ar Hildinyar tenn' Ambarmetta!_\par
And those were the words that Elendil spoke when he came up out of the\par
Sea on the wings of the wind: 'Out of the Great Sea to Middle-earth I am come.\par
In this place will I abide, and my heirs, unto the ending of the world.'\par
Then to the wonder of many Aragorn did not put the crown upon his head,\par
but gave it back to Faramir, and said: 'By the labour and valour of many I\par
have come into my inheritance. In token of this I would have the Ring-bearer\par
bring the crown to me, and let Mithrandir set it upon my head, if he will; for\par
he has been the mover of all that has been accomplished, and this is his\par
victory.'\par
Then Frodo came forward and took the crown from Faramir and bore it to\par
Gandalf; and Aragorn knelt, and Gandalf set the White Crown upon his head, and\par
said:\par
'Now come the days of the King, and may they be blessed while the thrones\par
of the Valar endure!'\par
But when Aragorn arose all that beheld him gazed in silence, for it\par
seemed to them that he was revealed to them now for the first time. Tall as\par
the sea-kings of old, he stood above all that were near; ancient of days he\par
seemed and yet in the flower of manhood; and wisdom sat upon his brow, and\par
strength and healing were in his hands, and a light was about him. And then\par
Faramir cried:\par
'Behold the King!'\par
And in that moment all the trumpets were blown, and the King Elessar went\par
forth and came to the barrier, and H\'farin of the Keys thrust it back; and amid\par
the music of harp and of viol and of flute and the singing of clear voices the\par
King passed through the flower-laden streets, and came to the Citadel, and\par
entered in; and the banner of the Tree and the Stars was unfurled upon the\par
topmost tower, and the reign of King Elessar began, of which many songs have\par
told.\par
In his time the City was made more fair than it had ever been, even in\par
the days of its first glory; and it was filled with trees and with fountains,\par
and its gates were wrought of mithril and steel, and its streets were paved\par
with white marble; and the Folk of the Mountain laboured in it, and the Folk\par
of the Wood rejoiced to come there; and all was healed and made good, and the\par
houses were filled with men and women and the laughter of children, and no\par
window was blind nor any courtyard empty; and after the ending of the Third\par
Age of the world into the new age it preserved the memory and the glory of the\par
years that were gone.\par
In the days that followed his crowning the King sat on his throne in the\par
Hall of the Kings and pronounced his judgements. And embassies came from many\par
lands and peoples, from the East and the South, and from the borders of\par
Mirkwood, and from Dunland in the west. And the King pardoned the Easterlings\par
that had given themselves up, and sent them away free, and he made peace with\par
the peoples of Harad; and the slaves of Mordor he released and gave to them\par
all the lands about Lake N\'farnen to be their own. And there were brought before\par
him many to receive his praise and reward for their valour; and last the\par
captain of the Guard brought to him Beregond to be judged.\par
And the King said to Beregond: 'Beregond, by your sword blood was spilled\par
in the Hallows, where that is forbidden. Also you left your post without leave\par
of Lord or of Captain. For these things, of old, death was the penalty. Now\par
therefore I must pronounce your doom.\par
'All penalty is remitted for your valour in battle, and still more\par
because all that you did was for the love of the Lord Faramir. Nonetheless you\par
must leave the Guard of the Citadel, and you must go forth from the City of\par
Minas Tirith.'\par
Then the blood left Beregond's face, and he was stricken to the heart and\par
bowed his head. But the King said.:\par
'So it must be, for you are appointed to the White Company, the Guard of\par
Faramir, Prince of Ithilien, and you shall be its captain and dwell in Emyn\par
Arnen in honour and peace, and in the service of him for whom you risked all,\par
to save him from death.'\par
And then Beregond, perceiving the mercy and justice of the King, was\par
glad, and kneeling kissed his hand, and departed in joy and content. And\par
Aragorn gave to Faramir Ithilien to be his princedom, and bade him dwell in\par
the hills of Emyn Arnen within sight of the City.\par
'For,' said he, 'Minas Ithil in Morgul Vale shall be utterly destroyed,\par
and though it may in time to come be made clean, no man may dwell there for\par
many long years.'\par
And last of all Aragorn greeted \'c9omer of Rohan, and they embraced, and\par
Aragorn said: 'Between us there can be no word of giving or taking, nor of\par
reward; for we are brethren. In happy hour did Eorl ride from the North, and\par
never has any league of peoples been more blessed, so that neither has ever\par
failed the other, nor shall fail. Now, as you know, we have laid Th\'e9oden the\par
Renowned in a tomb in the Hallows, and there he shall lie for ever among the\par
Kings of Gondor, if you will. Or if you desire it, we will come to Rohan and\par
bring him back to rest with his own people.'\par
And \'c9omer answered: 'Since the day when you rose before me out of the\par
green grass of the downs I have loved you, and that love shall not fail. But\par
now I must depart for a while to my own realm, where there is much to heal and\par
set in order. But as for the Fallen, when all is made ready we will return for\par
him; but here let him sleep a while.'\par
And \'c9owyn said to Faramir: 'Now I must go back to my own land and look on\par
it once again, and help my brother in his labour; but when one whom I long\par
loved as father is laid at last to rest, I will return.'\par
So the glad days passed; and on the eighth day of May the Riders of Rohan\par
made ready, and rode off by the North-way, and with them went the sons of\par
Elrond. All the road was lined with people to do them honour and praise them,\par
from the Gate of the City to the walls of the Pelennor. Then all others that\par
dwelt afar went back to their homes rejoicing; but in the City there was\par
labour of many willing hands to rebuild and renew and to remove all the scars\par
of war and the memory of the darkness.\par
The hobbits still remained in Minas Tirith, with Legolas and Gimli; for\par
Aragorn was loth for the fellowship to be dissolved. 'At last all such things\par
must end,' he said, 'but I would have you wait a little while longer: for the\par
end of the deeds that you have shared in has not yet come. A day draws near\par
that I have looked for in all the years of my manhood, and when it comes I\par
would have my friends beside me.' But of that day he would say no more.\par
In those days the Companions of the Ring dwelt together in a fair house\par
with Gandalf, and they went to and fro as they wished. And Frodo said to\par
Gandalf: 'Do you know what this day is that Aragorn speaks of? For we are\par
happy here, and I don't wish to go; but the days are running away, and Bilbo\par
is waiting; and the Shire is my home.'\par
'As for Bilbo,' said Gandalf, 'he is waiting for the same day, and he\par
knows what keeps you. And as for the passing of the days, it is now only May\par
and high summer is not yet in; and though all things may seem changed, as if\par
an age of the world had gone by, yet to the trees and the grass it is less\par
than a year since you set out.'\par
'Pippin,' said Frodo, 'didn't you say that Gandalf was less close than of\par
old? He was weary of his labours then, I think. Now he is recovering.'\par
And Gandalf said: 'Many folk like to know beforehand what is to be set on\par
the table; but those who have laboured to prepare the feast like to keep their\par
secret; for wonder makes the words of praise louder. And Aragorn himself waits\par
for a sign.'\par
There came a day when Gandalf could not be found, and the Companions\par
wondered what was going forward. But Gandalf took Aragorn out from the City by\par
night, and he brought him to the southern feet of Mount Mindolluin; and there\par
they found a path made in ages past that few now dared to tread. For it led up\par
on to the mountain to a high hallow where only the kings had been wont to go.\par
And they went up by steep ways, until they came to a high field below the\par
snows that clad the lofty peaks, and it looked down over the precipice that\par
stood behind the City. And standing there they surveyed the lands, for the\par
morning was come; and they saw the towers of the City far below them like\par
white pencils touched by the sunlight, and all the Vale of Anduin was like a\par
garden, and the Mountains of Shadow were veiled in a golden mist. Upon the one\par
side their sight reached to the grey Emyn Muil, and the glint of Rauros was\par
like a star twinkling far off; and upon the other side they saw the River like\par
a ribbon laid down to Pelargir, and beyond that was a light on the hem of the\par
sky that spoke of the Sea.\par
And Gandalf said: 'This is your realm, and the heart of the greater realm\par
that shall be. The Third Age of the world is ended, and the new age is begun;\par
and it is your task to order its beginning and to preserve what may be\par
preserved. For though much has been saved, much must now pass away; and the\par
power of the Three Rings also is ended. And all the lands that you see, and\par
those that lie round about them, shall be dwellings of Men. For the time comes\par
of the Dominion of Men, and the Elder Kindred shall fade or depart.'\par
'I know it well, dear friend,' said Aragorn; 'but I would still have your\par
counsel.'\par
'Not for long now,' said Gandalf. 'The Third Age was my age. I was the\par
Enemy of Sauron; and my work is finished. I shall go soon. The burden must lie\par
now upon you and your kindred.'\par
'But I shall die,' said Aragorn. 'For I am a mortal man, and though being\par
what I am and of the race of the West unmingled, I shall have life far longer\par
than other men, yet that is but a little while; and when those who are now in\par
the wombs of women are born and have grown old, I too shall grow old. And who\par
then shall govern Gondor and those who look to this City as to their queen, if\par
my desire be not granted? The Tree in the Court of the Fountain is still\par
withered and barren. When shall I see a sign that it will ever be otherwise?'\par
'Turn your face from the green world, and look where all seems barren and\par
cold!' said Gandalf.\par
Then Aragorn turned. and there was a stony slope behind him running down\par
from the skirts of the snow; and as he looked he was aware that alone there in\par
the waste a growing thing stood. And he climbed to it, and saw that out of the\par
very edge of the snow there sprang a sapling tree no more than three foot\par
high. Already it had put forth young leaves long and shapely, dark above and\par
silver beneath, and upon its slender crown it bore one small cluster of\par
flowers whose white petals shone like the sunlit snow.\par
Then Aragorn cried: '_Y\'e9! ut\'favienyes!_ I have found it! Lo! here is a\par
scion of the Eldest of Trees! But how comes it here? For it is not itself yet\par
seven years old.'\par
And Gandalf coming looked at it, and said: 'Verily this is a sapling of\par
the line of Nimloth the fair; and that was a seedling of Galathilion, and that\par
a fruit of Telperion of many names, Eldest of Trees. Who shall say how it\par
comes here in the appointed hour? But this is an ancient hallow, and ere the\par
kings failed or the Tree withered in the court, a fruit must have been set\par
here. For it is said that, though the fruit of the Tree comes seldom to\par
ripeness, yet the life within may then lie sleeping through many long years,\par
and none can foretell the time in which it will awake. Remember this. For if\par
ever a fruit ripens, it should be planted, lest the line die out of the world.\par
Here it has lain. hidden on the mountain, even as the race of Elendil lay\par
hidden in the wastes of the North. Yet the line of Nimloth is older far than\par
your line, King Elessar.'\par
Then Aragorn laid his hand gently to the sapling, and lo! it seemed to\par
hold only lightly to the earth, and it was removed without hurt; and Aragorn\par
bore it back to the Citadel. Then the withered tree was uprooted, but with\par
reverence; and they did not burn it, but laid it to rest in the silence of\par
Rath D\'ednen. And Aragorn planted the new tree in the court by the fountain, and\par
swiftly and gladly it began to grow; and when the month of June entered in it\par
was laden with blossom.\par
'The sign has been given,' said Aragorn, 'and the day is not far off.'\par
And he set watchmen upon the walls.\par
It was the day before Midsummer when messengers came from Amon Dn to the\par
City, and they said that there was a riding of fair folk out of the North, and\par
they drew near now to the walls of the Pelennor. And the King said: 'At last\par
they have come. Let all the City be made ready!'\par
Upon the very Eve of Midsummer, when the sky was blue as sapphire and\par
white stars opened in the East, but the West was still golden and the air was\par
cool and fragrant, the riders came down the North-way to the gates of Minas\par
Tirith. First rode Elrohir and Elladan with a banner of silver, and then came\par
Glorfindel and Erestor and all the household of Rivendell, and after them came\par
the Lady Galadriel and Celeborn, Lord of Lothl\'f3rien, riding upon white steeds\par
and with them many fair folk of their land, grey-cloaked with white gems in\par
their hair; and last came Master Elrond, mighty among Elves and Men, bearing\par
the sceptre of Ann\'faminas, and beside him upon a grey palfrey rode Arwen his\par
daughter, Evenstar of her people.\par
And Frodo when he saw her come glimmering in the evening, with stars on\par
her brow and a sweet fragrance about her, was moved with great wonder, and he\par
said to Gandalf: 'At last I understand why we have waited! This is the ending.\par
Now not day only shall be beloved, but night too shall be beautiful and\par
blessed and all its fear pass away!'\par
Then the King welcomed his guests, and they alighted; and Elrond\par
surrendered the sceptre, and laid the hand of his daughter in the hand of the\par
King, and together they went up into the High City, and all the stars flowered\par
in the sky. And Aragorn the King Elessar wedded Arwen Und\'f3miel in the City of\par
the Kings upon the day of Midsummer, and the tale of their long waiting and\par
labours was come to fulfilment.\par
_Chapter 6_\par
Many Partings\par
When the days of rejoicing were over at last the Companions thought of\par
returning to their own homes. And Frodo went to the King as he was sitting\par
with the Queen Arwen by the fountain, and she sang a song of Valinor, while\par
the Tree grew and blossomed. They welcomed Frodo and rose to greet him; and\par
Aragorn said:\par
'I know what you have come to say, Frodo: you wish to return to your own\par
home. Well, dearest friend, the tree grows best in the land of its sires; but\par
for you in all the lands of the West there will ever be a welcome. And though\par
your people have had little fame in the legends of the great, they will now\par
have more renown than any wide realms that are no more.'\par
'It is true that I wish to go back to the Shire,' said Frodo. 'But first\par
I must go to Rivendell. For if there could be anything wanting in a time so\par
blessed, I missed Bilbo; and I was grieved when among all the household of\par
Elrond I saw that he was not come.'\par
'Do you wonder at that, Ring-bearer?' said Arwen. 'For you know the power\par
of that thing which is now destroyed; and all that was done by that power is\par
now passing away. But your kinsman possessed this thing longer than you. He is\par
ancient in years now, according to his kind; and he awaits you, for he will\par
not again make any long journey save one.'\par
'Then I beg leave to depart soon,' said Frodo.\par
'In seven days we will go,' said Aragorn. 'For we shall ride with you far\par
on the road, even as far as the country of Rohan. In three days now \'c9omer will\par
return hither to bear Th\'e9oden back to rest in the Mark, and we shall ride with\par
him to honour the fallen. But now before you go I will confirm the words that\par
Faramir spoke to you, and you are made free for ever of the realm of Gondor;\par
and all your companions likewise. And if there were any gifts that I could\par
give to match with your deeds you should have them; but whatever you desire\par
you shall take with you, and you shall ride in honour and arrayed as princes\par
of the land.'\par
But the Queen Arwen said: 'A gift I will give you. For I am the daughter\par
of Elrond. I shall not go with him now when he departs to the Havens; for mine\par
is the choice of L\'fathien, and as she so have I chosen, both the sweet and the\par
bitter. But in my stead you shall go, Ring-bearer, when the time comes, and if\par
you then desire it. If your hurts grieve you still and the memory of your\par
burden is heavy, then you may pass into the West, until all your wounds and\par
weariness are healed. But wear this now in memory of Elfstone and Evenstar\par
with whom your life has been woven!'\par
And she took a white gem like a star that lay upon her breast hanging\par
upon a silver chain, and she set the chain about Frodo's neck. 'When the\par
memory of the fear and the darkness troubles you,' she said, 'this will bring\par
you aid.'\par
In three days, as the King had said, \'c9omer of Rohan came riding to the\par
City, and with him came an _\'e9ored_ of the fairest knights of the Mark. He was\par
welcomed; and when they sat all at table in Merethrond, the Great Hall of\par
Feasts, he beheld the beauty of the ladies that he saw and was filled with\par
great wonder. And before he went to his rest he sent for Gimli the Dwarf, and\par
he said to him: 'Gimli Gl\'f3in's son, have you your axe ready?'\par
'Nay, lord,' said Gimli, 'but I can speedily fetch it, if there be need.'\par
'You shall judge,' said \'c9omer. 'For there are certain rash words\par
concerning the Lady in the Golden Wood that lie still between us. And now I\par
have seen her with my eyes.'\par
'Well, lord,' said Gimli, 'and what say you now?'\par
'Alas!' said \'c9omer. 'I will not say that she is the fairest lady that\par
lives.'\par
'Then I must go for my axe,' said Gimli.\par
'But first I will plead this excuse,' said \'c9omer. 'Had I seen her in\par
other company, I would have said all that you could wish. But now I will put\par
Queen Arwen Evenstar first, and I am ready to do battle on my own part with\par
any who deny me. Shall I call for my sword?'\par
Then Gimli bowed low. 'Nay, you are excused for my part, lord,' he said.\par
'You have chosen the Evening; but my love is given to the Morning. And my\par
heart forebodes that soon it will past away for ever.'\par
At last the day of departure came, and a great and fair company made\par
ready to ride north from the City. Then the kings of Gondor and Rohan went to\par
the Hallows and they came to the tombs in Rath D\'ednen, and they bore away King\par
Th\'e9oden upon a golden bier, and passed through the City in silence. Then they\par
laid the bier upon a great wain with Riders of Rohan all about it and his\par
banner borne before; and Merry being Th\'e9oden's esquire rode upon the wain and\par
kept the arms of the king.\par
For the other Companions steeds were furnished according to their\par
stature; and Frodo and Samwise rode at Aragorn's side, and Gandalf rode upon\par
Shadowfax, and Pippin rode with the knights of Gondor; and Legolas and Gimli\par
as ever rode together upon Arod.\par
In that riding went also Queen Arwen, and Celeborn and Galadriel with\par
their folk, and Elrond and his sons; and the princes of Dol Amroth and of\par
Ithilien, and many captains and knights. Never had any king of the Mark such\par
company upon the road as went with Th\'e9oden Thengel's son to the land of his\par
home.\par
Without haste and at peace they passed into An\'f3rien, and they came to the\par
Grey Wood under Amon Dn; and there they heard a sound as of drums beating in\par
the hills, though no living thing could be seen. Then Aragorn let the trumpets\par
be blown; and heralds cried:\par
'Behold the King Elessar is come! The Forest of Dr\'faadan he gives to Gh\'e2nburi-\par
gh\'e2n and to his folk, to be their own for ever; and hereafter let no man\par
enter it without their leave!'\par
Then the drums rolled loudly, and were silent.\par
At length after fifteen days of journey the wain of King Th\'e9oden passed\par
through the green fields of Rohan and came to Edoras; and there they all\par
rested. The Golden Hall was arrayed with fair hangings and it was filled with\par
light, and there was held the highest feast that it had known since the days\par
of its building. For after three days the Men of the Mark prepared the funeral\par
of Th\'e9oden; and he was laid in a house of stone with his arms and many other\par
fair things that he had possessed, and over him was raised a great mound,\par
covered with green turves of grass and of white evermind. And now there were\par
eight mounds on the east-side of the Barrowfield.\par
Then the Riders of the King's House upon white horses rode round about\par
the barrow and sang together a song of Th\'e9oden Thengel's son that Gl\'e9owine his\par
minstrel made, and he made no other song after. The slow voices of the Riders\par
stirred the hearts even of those who did not know the speech of that people;\par
but the words of the song brought a light to the eyes of the folk of the Mark\par
as they heard again afar the thunder of the hooves of the North and the voice\par
of Eorl crying above the battle upon the Field of Celebrant; and the tale of\par
the kings rolled on, and the horn of Helm was loud in the mountains, until the\par
Darkness came and King Th\'e9oden arose and rode through the Shadow to the fire,\par
and died in splendour, even as the Sun, returning beyond hope, gleamed upon\par
Mindolluin in the morning.\par
_Out of doubt, out of dark, to the day's rising\par
he rode singing in the sun, sword unsheathing.\par
Hope he rekindled, and in hope ended;\par
over death, over dread, over doom lifted\par
out of loss, out of life, unto long glory._\par
But Merry stood at the foot of the green mound, and he wept, and when the\par
song was ended he arose and cried:\par
'Th\'e9oden King, Th\'e9oden King! Farewell! As a father you were to me. for a\par
little while. Farewell!'\par
When the burial was over and the weeping of women was stilled, and\par
Th\'e9oden was left at last alone in his barrow, then folk gathered to the Golden\par
Hall for the great feast and put away sorrow; for Th\'e9oden had lived to full\par
years and ended in honour no less than the greatest of his sires. And when the\par
time came that in the custom of the Mark they should drink to the memory of\par
the kings, \'c9owyn Lady of Rohan came forth, golden as the sun and white as\par
snow, and she bore a filled cup to \'c9omer.\par
Then a minstrel and loremaster stood up and named all the names of the\par
Lords of the Mark in their order: Eorl the Young; and Brego builder of the\par
Hall; and Aldor brother of Baldor the hapless; and Fr\'e9a, and Fr\'e9awine, and\par
Goldwine, and D\'e9or, and Gram; and Helm who lay hid in Helm's Deep when the\par
Mark was overrun; and so ended the nine mounds of the west-side, for in that\par
time the line was broken, and after came the mounds of the east-side: Fr\'e9alaf,\par
Helm s sister-son, and L\'e9ofa, and Walda, and Folca, and Folcwine, and Fengel,\par
and Thengel, and Th\'e9oden the latest. And when Th\'e9oden was named \'c9omer drained\par
the cup. Then \'c9owyn bade those that served to fill the cups, and all there\par
assembled rose and drank to the new king, crying: 'Hail, \'c9omer, King of the\par
Mark!'\par
At the last when the feast drew to an end \'c9omer arose and said: 'Now this\par
is the funeral feast of Th\'e9oden the King; but I will speak ere we go of\par
tidings of joy, for he would not grudge that I should do so, since he was ever\par
a father of \'c9owyn my sister. Hear then all my guests, fair folk of many\par
realms, such as have never before been gathered in this hall! Faramir, Steward\par
of Gondor, and Prince of Ithilien, asks that \'c9owyn Lady of Rohan should be his\par
wife, and she grants it full willing. Therefore they shall be trothplighted\par
before you all.'\par
And Faramir and \'c9owyn stood forth and set hand in hand; and all there\par
drank to them and were glad. 'Thus,' said \'c9omer, 'is the friendship of the\par
Mark and of Gondor bound with a new bond, and the more do I rejoice.'\par
'No niggard are you, \'c9omer,' said Aragorn, 'to give thus to Gondor the\par
fairest thing in your realm!'\par
Then \'c9owyn looked in the eyes of Aragorn, and she said: 'Wish me joy, my\par
liege-lord and healer!'\par
And he answered: 'I have wished thee joy ever since first I saw thee. It\par
heals my heart to see thee now in bliss.'\par
When the feast was over, those who were to go took leave of King \'c9omer.\par
Aragorn and his knights, and the people of L\'f3rien and of Rivendell, made ready\par
to ride; but Faramir and Imrahil remained at Edoras; and Arwen Evenstar\par
remained also, and she said farewell to her brethren. None saw her last\par
meeting with Elrond her father, for they went up into the hills and there\par
spoke long together, and bitter was their parting that should endure beyond\par
the ends of the world.\par
At the last before the guests set oat \'c9omer and \'c9owyn came to Merry, and\par
they said: 'Farewell now, Meriadoc of the Shire and Holdwine of the Mark! Ride\par
to good fortune, and ride back soon to our welcome!'\par
And \'c9omer said: 'Kings of old would have laden you with gifts that a wain\par
could not bear for your deeds upon the fields of Mundburg; and yet you will\par
take naught, you say, but the arms that were given to you. This I suffer, for\par
indeed I have no gift that is worthy; but my sister begs you to receive this\par
small thing, as a memorial of Dernhelm and of the horns of the Mark at the\par
coming of the morning.'\par
Then \'c9owyn gave to Merry an ancient horn, small but cunningly wrought all\par
of fair silver with a baldric of green; and wrights had engraven upon it swift\par
horsemen riding in a line that wound about it from the tip to the mouth; and\par
there were set runes of great virtue.\par
'This is an heirloom of our house,' said \'c9owyn. 'It was made by the\par
Dwarves, and came from the hoard of Scatha the Worm. Eorl the Young brought it\par
from the North. He that blows it at need shall set fear in the hearts of his\par
enemies and joy in the hearts of his friends, and they shall hear him and come\par
to him.'\par
Then Merry took the horn, for it could not be refused, and he kissed\par
\'c9owyn's hand; and they embraced him, and so they parted for that time.\par
Now the guests were ready, and they drank the stirrup-cup, and with great\par
praise and friendship they departed, and came at length to Helm's Deep, and\par
there they rested two days. Then Legolas repaid his promise to Gimli and went\par
with him to the Glittering Caves; and when they returned he was silent, and\par
would say only that Gimli alone could find fit words to speak of them. 'And\par
never before has a Dwarf claimed a victory over an Elf in a contest of\par
words,' said he. 'Now therefore let us go to Fangorn and set the score right!'\par
From Deeping-coomb they rode to Isengard, and saw how the Ents had busied\par
themselves. All the stone-circle had been thrown down and removed, and the\par
land within was made into a garden filled with orchards and trees, and a\par
stream ran through it; but in the midst of all there was a lake of clear\par
water, and out of it the Tower of Orthanc rose still, tall and impregnable,\par
and its black rock was mirrored in the pool.\par
For a while the travellers sat where once the old gates of Isengard had\par
stood, and there were now two tall trees like sentinels at the beginning of a\par
green-bordered path that ran towards Orthanc; and they looked in wonder at the\par
work that had been done, but no living thing could they see far or near. But\par
presently they heard a voice calling _hoom-hom_, _hoom-hom_; and there came\par
Treebeard striding down the path to greet them with Quickbeam at his side.\par
'Welcome to the Treegarth of Orthanc!' he said. 'I knew that you were\par
coming, but I was at work up the valley; there is much still to be done. But\par
you have not been idle either away in the south and the east, I hear; and all\par
that I hear is good, very good.' Then Treebeard praised all their deeds, of\par
which he seemed to have full knowledge; and at last he stopped and looked long\par
at Gandalf.\par
'Well, come now!' he said. 'You have proved mightiest, and all your\par
labours have gone well. Where now would you be going? And why do you come\par
here?'\par
'To see how your work goes, my friend,' said Gandalf, 'and to thank you\par
for your aid in all that has been achieved.'\par
_'Hoom_, well, that is fair enough,' said Treebeard; 'for to be sure Ents\par
have played their part. And not only in dealing with that, _hoom_, that\par
accursed tree-slayer that dwelt here. For there was a great inrush of those,\par
_bur\'e1rum_, those evileyed \endash  blackhanded \endash  bowlegged \endash  flinthearted \endash\par
clawfingered \endash  foulbellied \endash  bloodthirsty, _morimaite \endash  sincahonda_, _hoom_,\par
well, since you are hasty folk and their full name is as long as years of\par
torment, those vermin of orcs; and they came over the River and down from the\par
North and all round the wood of Laurelind\'f3renan, which they could not get\par
into, thanks to the Great ones who are here.' He bowed to the Lord and Lady of\par
L\'f3rien.\par
'And these same foul creatures were more than surprised to meet us out on\par
the Wold, for they had not heard of us before; though that might be said also\par
of better folk. And not many will remember us, for not many escaped us alive,\par
and the River had most of those. But it was well for you, for if they had not\par
met us, then the king of the grassland would not have ridden far, and if he\par
had there would have been no home to return to.'\par
'We know it well,' said Aragorn, 'and never shall it be forgotten in\par
Minas Tirith or in Edoras.'\par
'_Never_ is too long a word even for me,' said Treebeard. 'Not while your\par
kingdoms last, you mean; but they will have to last long indeed to seem long\par
to Ents.'\par
'The New Age begins,' said Gandalf, 'and in this age it may well prove\par
that the kingdoms of Men shall outlast you, Fangorn my friend. But now come\par
tell me: what of the task that I set you? How is Saruman? Is he not weary of\par
Orthanc yet? For I do not suppose that he will think you have improved the\par
view from his windows.'\par
Treebeard gave Gandalf a long look, a most cunning look, Merry thought.\par
'Ah!' he said. 'I thought you would come to that. Weary of Orthanc? Very weary\par
at last; but not so weary of his tower as he was weary of my voice. _Hoom_! I\par
gave him some long tales, or at least what might be thought long in your\par
speech.'\par
'Then why did he stay to listen? Did you go into Orthanc?' asked Gandalf.\par
_'Hoom_, no, not into Orthanc!' said Treebeard. 'But he came to his\par
window and listened, because he could not get news in any other way, and\par
though he hated the news, he was greedy to have it; and I saw that he heard it\par
all. But I added a great many things to the news that it was good for him to\par
think of. He grew very weary. He always was hasty. That was his ruin.'\par
'I observe, my good Fangorn,' said Gandalf, 'that with great care you say\par
_dwelt_, _was_, _grew_. What about _is_? Is he dead?'\par
'No, not dead, so far as I know,' said Treebeard. 'But he is gone. Yes,\par
he is gone seven days. I let him go. There was little left of him when he\par
crawled out, and as for that worm-creature of his, he was like a pale shadow.\par
Now do not tell me, Gandalf, that I promised to keep him safe; for I know it.\par
But things have changed since then. And I kept him until he was safe, safe\par
from doing any more harm. You should know that above all I hate the caging of\par
live things, and I will not keep even such creatures as these caged beyond\par
great need. A snake without fangs may crawl where he will.'\par
'You may be right,' said Gandalf; 'but this snake had still one tooth\par
left, I think. He had the poison of his voice, and I guess that he persuaded\par
you, even you Treebeard, knowing the soft spot in your heart. Well, he is\par
gone, and there is no more to be said. But the Tower of Orthanc now goes back\par
to the King, to whom it belongs. Though maybe he will not need it.'\par
'That will be seen later,' said Aragorn. 'But I will give to Ents all\par
this valley to do with as they will, so long as they keep a watch upon Orthanc\par
and see that none enter it without my leave.'\par
'It is locked,' said Treebeard. 'I made Saruman lock it and give me the\par
keys. Quickbeam has them.'\par
Quickbeam bowed like a tree bending in the wind and handed to Aragorn two\par
great black keys of intricate shape, joined by a ring of steel. 'Now I thank\par
you once more,' said Aragorn, 'and I bid you farewell. May your forest grow\par
again in peace. When this valley is filled there is room and to spare west of\par
the mountains, where once you walked long ago.'\par
Treebeard's face became sad. 'Forests may grow,' he said. 'Woods may\par
spread. But not Ents. There are no Entings.'\par
'Yet maybe there is now more hope in your search,' said Aragorn. 'Lands\par
will lie open to you eastward that have long been closed.'\par
But Treebeard shook his head and said: 'It is far to go. And there are\par
too many Men there in these days. But I am forgetting my manners! Will you\par
stay here and rest a while? And maybe there are some that would be pleased to\par
pass through Fangorn Forest and so shorten their road home?' He looked at\par
Celeborn and Galadriel.\par
But all save Legolas said that they must now take their leave and depart,\par
either south or west. 'Come, Gimli!' said Legolas. 'Now by Fangorn's leave I\par
will visit the deep places of the Entwood and see such trees as are nowhere\par
else to be found in Middle-earth. You shall come with me and keep your word;\par
and thus we will journey on together to our own lands in Mirkwood and\par
beyond.' To this Gimli agreed, though with no great delight, it seemed.\par
'Here then at last comes the ending of the Fellowship of the Ring,' said\par
Aragorn. 'Yet I hope that ere long you will return to my land with the help\par
that you promised.'\par
'We will come, if our own lords allow it,' said Gimli. 'Well, farewell.\par
my hobbits! You should come safe to your own homes now, and I shall not be\par
kept awake for fear of your peril. We will send word when we may, and some of\par
us may yet meet at times; but I fear that we shall not all be gathered\par
together ever again.'\par
Then Treebeard said farewell to each of them in turn, and he bowed three\par
times slowly and with great reverence to Celeborn and Galadriel. 'It is long,\par
long since we met by stock or by stone, _A vanimar_, _vanim\'e1lion nostari!_' he\par
said. 'It is sad that we should meet only thus at the ending. For the world is\par
changing: I feel it in the water, I feel it in the earth, and I smell it in\par
the air. I do not think we shall meet again.'\par
And Celeborn said: 'I do not know, Eldest.' But Galadriel said: 'Not in\par
Middle-earth, nor until the lands that lie under the wave are lifted up again.\par
Then in the willow-meads of Tasarinan we may meet in the Spring. Farewell!'\par
Last of all Merry and Pippin said good-bye to the old Ent, and he grew\par
gayer as he looked at them. 'Well, my merry folk,' he said, 'will you drink\par
another draught with me before you go?'\par
'Indeed we will,' they said, and he took them aside into the shade of one\par
of the trees, and there they saw that a great stone jar had been set. And\par
Treebeard filled three bowls, and they drank; and they saw his strange eyes\par
looking at them over the rim of his bowl. 'Take care take care!' he said. 'For\par
you have already grown since I saw you last.' And they laughed and drained\par
their bowls.\par
'Well, good-bye!' he said. 'And don't forget that if you hear any news of\par
the Entwives in your land, you will send word to me.' Then he waved his great\par
hands to all the company and went off into the trees.\par
The travellers now rode with more speed, and they made their way towards\par
the Gap of Rohan; and Aragorn took leave of them at last close to that very\par
place where Pippin had looked into the Stone of Orthanc. The Hobbits were\par
grieved at this parting; for Aragorn had never failed them and he had been\par
their guide through many perils.\par
'I wish we could have a Stone that we could see all our friends in,' said\par
Pippin, 'and that we could speak to them from far away!'\par
'Only one now remains that you could use,' answered Aragorn for you would\par
not wish to see what the Stone of Minas Tirith would show you. But the\par
Palant\'edr of Orthanc the King will keep, to see what is passing in his realm,\par
and what his servants are doing. For do not forget, Peregrin Took, that you\par
are a knight of Gondor, and I do not release you from your service. You are\par
going now on leave, but I may recall you. And remember, dear friends of the\par
Shire, that my realm lies also in the North, and I shall come there one day.'\par
Then Aragorn took leave of Celeborn and Galadriel; and the Lady said to\par
him: 'Elfstone, through darkness you have come to your hope, and have now all\par
your desire. Use well the days!'\par
But Celeborn said: 'Kinsman, farewell! May your doom be other than mine,\par
and your treasure remain with you to the end!'\par
With that they parted, and it was then the time of sunset; and when after\par
a while they turned and looked back, they saw the King of the West sitting\par
upon his horse with his knights about him; and the falling Sun shone upon them\par
and made all their harness to gleam like red gold, and the white mantle of\par
Aragorn was turned to a flame. Then Aragorn took the green stone and held it\par
up, and there came a green fire from his hand.\par
Soon the dwindling company, following the Isen, turned west and rode\par
through the Gap into the waste lands beyond, and then they turned northwards,\par
and passed over the borders of Dunland. The Dunlendings fled and hid\par
themselves, for they were afraid of Elvish Folk, though few indeed ever came\par
to their country; but the travellers did not heed them, for they were still a\par
great company and were well provided with all that they needed; and they went\par
on their way at their leisure, setting up their tents when they would.\par
On the sixth day since their parting from the King they journeyed through\par
a wood climbing down from the hills at the feet of the Misty Mountains that\par
now marched on their right hand. As they came out again into the open country\par
at sundown they overtook an old man leaning on a staff, and he was clothed in\par
rags of grey or dirty white, and at his heels went another beggar, slouching\par
and whining.\par
'Well Saruman!' said Gandalf. 'Where are you going?'\par
'What is that to you?' he answered. 'Will you still order my goings, and\par
are you not content with my ruin?'\par
'You know the answers,' said Gandalf: 'no and no. But in any case the\par
time of my labours now draws to an end. The King has taken on the burden. If\par
you had waited at Orthanc, you would have seen him, and he would have shown\par
you wisdom and mercy.'\par
'Then all the more reason to have left sooner,' said Saruman; 'for I\par
desire neither of him. Indeed if you wish for an answer to your first\par
question, I am seeking a way out of his realm.'\par
'Then once more you are going the wrong way,' said Gandalf, 'and I see no\par
hope in your journey. But will you scorn our help? For we offer it to you.'\par
'To me?' said Saruman. 'Nay, pray do not smile at me! I prefer your\par
frowns. And as for the Lady here, I do not trust her: she always hated me, and\par
schemed for your part. I do not doubt that she has brought you this way to\par
have the pleasure of gloating over my poverty. Had I been warned of your\par
pursuit, I would have denied you the pleasure.'\par
'Saruman,' said Galadriel, 'we have other errands and other cares that\par
seem to us more urgent than hunting for you. Say rather that you are overtaken\par
by good fortune; for now you have a last chance.'\par
'If it be truly the last, I am glad,' said Saruman; 'for I shall be\par
spared the trouble of refusing it again. All my hopes are ruined, but I would\par
not share yours. If you have any.'\par
For a moment his eyes kindled. 'Go!' he said. 'I did not spend long study\par
on these matters for naught. You have doomed yourselves, and you know it. And\par
it will afford me some comfort as I wander to think that you pulled down your\par
own house when you destroyed mine. And now, what ship will bear you back\par
across so wide a sea?' he mocked. 'It will be a grey ship, and full of\par
ghosts.' He laughed, but his voice was cracked and hideous.\par
'Get up, you idiot!' he shouted to the other beggar, who had sat down on\par
the ground; and he struck him with his staff. 'Turn about! If these fine folk\par
are going our way, then we will take another. Get on, or I'll give you no\par
crust for your supper!'\par
The beggar turned and slouched past whimpering: 'Poor old Gr\'edma! Poor old\par
Gr\'edma! Always beaten and cursed. How I hate him! I wish I could leave him!'\par
'Then leave him!' said Gandalf.\par
But Wormtongue only shot a glance of his bleared eyes full of terror at\par
Gandalf, and then shuffled quickly past behind Saruman. As the wretched pair\par
passed by the company they came to the hobbits, and Saruman stopped and stared\par
at them; but they looked at him with pity.\par
'So you have come to gloat too, have you, my urchins?' he said. 'You\par
don't care what a beggar lacks, do you? For you have all you want, food and\par
fine clothes, and the best weed for your pipes. Oh yes, I know! I know where\par
it comes from. You would not give a pipeful to a beggar, would you?'\par
'I would, if I had any,' said Frodo.\par
'You can have what I have got left,' said Merry, 'if you will wait a\par
moment.' He got down and searched in the bag at his saddle. Then he handed to\par
Saruman a leather pouch. 'Take what there is,' he said. 'You are welcome to\par
it; it came from the flotsam of Isengard.'\par
'Mine, mine, yes and dearly bought!' cried Saruman, clutching at the\par
pouch. 'This is only a repayment in token; for you took more, I'll be bound.\par
Still, a beggar must be grateful, if a thief returns him even a morsel of his\par
own. Well, it will serve you right when you come home, if you find things less\par
good in the Southfarthing than you would like. Long may your land be short of\par
leaf!'\par
'Thank you!' said Merry. 'In that case I will have my pouch back, which\par
is not yours and has journeyed far with me. Wrap the weed in a rag of your\par
own.'\par
'One thief deserves another,' said Saruman, and turned his back on Merry,\par
and kicked Wormtongue, and went away towards the wood.\par
'Well, I like that!' said Pippin. 'Thief indeed! What of our claim for\par
waylaying, wounding, and orc-dragging us through Rohan?'\par
'Ah!' said Sam. 'And _bought_ he said. How, I wonder? And I didn't like\par
the sound of what he said about the Southfarthing. It's time we got back.'\par
'I'm sure it is,' said Frodo. 'But we can't go any quicker, if we are to\par
see Bilbo. I am going to Rivendell first, whatever happens.'\par
'Yes, I think you had better do that,' said Gandalf. 'But alas for\par
Saruman! I fear nothing more can be made of him. He has withered altogether.\par
All the same, I am not sure that Treebeard is right: I fancy he could do some\par
mischief still in a small mean way.'\par
Next day they went on into northern Dunland, where no men now dwelt,\par
though it was a green and pleasant country. September came in with golden days\par
and silver nights, and they rode at ease until they reached the Swanfleet\par
river, and found the old ford, east of the falls where it went down suddenly\par
into the lowlands. Far to the west in a haze lay the meres and eyots through\par
which it wound its way to the Greyflood: there countless swans housed in a\par
land of reeds.\par
So they passed into Eregion, and at last a fair morning dawned,\par
shimmering above gleaming mists; and looking from their camp on a low hill the\par
travellers saw away in the east the Sun catching three peaks that thrust up\par
into the sky through floating clouds: Caradhras, Celebdil, and Fanuidhol. They\par
were near to the Gates of Moria.\par
Here now for seven days they tarried, for the time was at hand for\par
another parting which they were loth to make. Soon Celeborn and Galadriel and\par
their folk would turn eastward, and so pass by the Redhorn Gate and down the\par
Dimrill Stair to the Silverlode and to their own country. They had journeyed\par
thus far by the west-ways, for they had much to speak of with Elrond and with\par
Gandalf, and here they lingered still in converse with their friends. Often\par
long after the hobbits were wrapped in sleep they would sit together under the\par
stars, recalling the ages that were gone and all their joys and labours in the\par
world, or holding council, concerning the days to come. If any wanderer had\par
chanced to pass, little would he have seen or heard, and it would have seemed\par
to him only that he saw grey figures, carved in stone, memorials of forgotten\par
things now lost in unpeopled lands. For they did not move or speak with mouth,\par
looking from mind to mind; and only their shining eyes stirred and kindled as\par
their thoughts went to and fro.\par
But at length all was said, and they parted again for a while, until it\par
was time for the Three Rings to pass away. Quickly fading into the stones and\par
the shadows the grey-cloaked people of L\'f3rien rode towards the mountains; and\par
those who were going to Rivendell sat on the hill and watched, until there\par
came out of the gathering mist a flash; and then they saw no more. Frodo knew\par
that Galadriel had held aloft her ring in token of farewell.\par
Sam turned away and sighed: 'I wish I was going back to L\'f3rien!'\par
At last one evening they came over the high moors, suddenly as to\par
travellers it always seemed, to the brink of the deep valley of Rivendell and\par
saw far below the lamps shining in Elrond's house. And they went down and\par
crossed the bridge and came to the doors, and all the house was filled with\par
light and song for joy at Elrond's homecoming.\par
First of all, before they had eaten or washed or even shed their cloaks,\par
the hobbits went in search of Bilbo. They found him all alone in his little\par
room. It was littered with papers and pens and pencils; but Bilbo was sitting\par
in a chair before a small bright fire. He looked very old, but peaceful, and\par
sleepy.\par
He opened his eyes and looked up as they came in. 'Hullo, hullo!' he\par
said. 'So you've come back? And tomorrow's my birthday, too. How clever of\par
you! Do you know, I shall be one hundred and twenty-nine? And in one year\par
more, if I am spared, I shall equal the Old Took. I should like to beat him;\par
but we shall see.'\par
After the celebration of Bilbo's birthday the four hobbits stayed in\par
Rivendell for some days, and they sat much with their old friend, who spent\par
most of his time now in his room, except at meals. For these he was still very\par
punctual as a rule, and he seldom failed to wake up in time for them. Sitting\par
round the fire they told him in turn all that they could remember of their\par
journeys and adventures. At first he pretended to take some notes; but he\par
often fell asleep; and when he woke he would say: 'How splendid! How\par
wonderful! But where were we?' Then they went on with the story from the point\par
where he had begun to nod.\par
The only part that seemed really to rouse him and hold his attention was\par
the account of the crowning and marriage of Aragorn. 'I was invited to the\par
wedding of course,' he said. 'And I have waited for it long enough. But\par
somehow, when it came to it, I found I had so much to do here; and packing is\par
such a bother.'\par
When nearly a fortnight had passed Frodo looked out of his window and saw\par
that there had been a frost in the night, and the cobwebs were like white\par
nets. Then suddenly he knew that he must go, and say good-bye to Bilbo. The\par
weather was still calm and fair, after one of the most lovely summers that\par
people could remember; but October had come, and it must break soon and begin\par
to rain and blow again. And there was still a very long way to go. Yet it was\par
not really the thought of the weather that stirred him. He had a feeling that\par
it was time he went back to the Shire. Sam shared it. Only the night before he\par
had said:\par
'Well, Mr. Frodo, we've been far and seen a deal, and yet I don't think\par
we've found a better place than this. There's something of everything here, if\par
you understand me: the Shire and the Golden Wood and Gondor and kings' houses\par
and inns and meadows and mountains all mixed. And yet, somehow, I feel we\par
ought to be going soon. I'm worried about my gaffer, to tell you the truth.'\par
'Yes, something of everything, Sam, except the Sea,' Frodo had answered;\par
and he repeated it now to himself: 'Except the Sea.'\par
That day Frodo spoke to Elrond, and it was agreed that they should leave\par
the next morning. To their delight Gandalf said: 'I think I shall come too. At\par
least as far as Bree. I want to see Butterbur.'\par
In the evening they went to say good-bye to Bilbo. 'Well, if you must go,\par
you must,' he said. 'I am sorry. I shall miss you. It is nice just to know\par
that you are about the place. But I am getting very sleepy.' Then he gave\par
Frodo his mithril-coat and Sting, forgetting that he had already done so; and\par
he gave him also three books of lore that he had made at various times,\par
written in his spidery hand, and labelled on their red backs: _Translations\par
from the Elvish, by B.B._\par
To Sam he gave a little bag of gold. 'Almost the last drop of the Smaug\par
vintage,' he said. 'May come in useful, if you think of getting married,\par
Sam.' Sam blushed.\par
'I have nothing much to give to you young fellows,' he said to Merry and\par
Pippin, 'except good advice.' And when he had given them a fair sample of\par
this, he added a last item in Shire-fashion: 'Don't let your heads get too big\par
for your hats! But if you don't finish growing up soon, you are going to find\par
hats and clothes expensive.'\par
'But if you want to beat the Old Took,' said Pippin, 'I don't see why we\par
shouldn't try and beat the Bullroarer.'\par
Bilbo laughed, and he produced out of a pocket two beautiful pipes with\par
pearl mouth-pieces and bound with fine-wrought silver. 'Think of me when you\par
smoke them!' he said. 'The Elves made them for me, but I don't smoke now.' And\par
then suddenly he nodded and went to sleep for a little; and when he woke up\par
again he said: 'Now where were we? Yes, of course, giving presents. Which\par
reminds me: what's become of my ring, Frodo, that you took away?'\par
'I have lost it, Bilbo dear,' said Frodo. 'I got rid of it, you know.'\par
'What a pity!' said Bilbo. 'I should have liked to see it again. But no,\par
how silly of me! That's what you went for, wasn't it: to get rid of it? But it\par
is all so confusing, for such a lot of other things seem to have got mixed up\par
with it: Aragorn's affairs, and the White Council and Gondor, and the\par
Horsemen, and Southrons, and oliphaunts \endash  did you really see one, Sam? \endash  and\par
caves and towers and golden trees, and goodness knows what besides.\par
'I evidently came back by much too straight a road from my trip. I think\par
Gandalf might have shown me round a bit. But then the auction would have been\par
over before I got back, and I should have had even more trouble than I did.\par
Anyway it's too late now; and really I think it's much more comfortable to sit\par
here and hear about it all. The fire's very cosy here, and the food's very\par
good, and there are Elves when you want them. What more could one want?\par
_The Road goes ever on and on\par
Out from the door where it began.\par
Now far ahead the Road has gone,\par
Let others follow it who can!\par
Let them a journey new begin,\par
But I at last with weary feet\par
Will turn towards the lighted inn,\par
My evening-rest and sleep to meet.'_\par
And as Bilbo murmured the last words his head dropped on his chest and he\par
slept soundly.\par
The evening deepened in the room, and the firelight burned brighter; and\par
they looked at Bilbo as he slept and saw that his face was smiling. For some\par
time they sat in silence; and then Sam looking round at the room and the\par
shadows flickering on the walls, said softly:\par
'I don't think, Mr. Frodo, that he's done much writing while we've been\par
away. He won't ever write our story now.'\par
At that Bilbo opened an eye, almost as if he had heard. Then he roused\par
himself. 'You see, I am getting so sleepy,' he said. 'And when I have time to\par
write, I only really like writing poetry. I wonder, Frodo my dear fellow, if\par
you would very much mind tidying things up a bit before you go? Collect all my\par
notes and papers, and my diary too, and take them with you, if you will. You\par
see, I haven't much time for the selection and the arrangement and all that.\par
Get Sam to help, and when you've knocked things into shape, come back, and\par
I'll run over it. I won't be too critical.'\par
'Of course I'll do it!' said Frodo. 'And of course I'll come back soon:\par
it won't be dangerous any more. There is a real king now and he will soon put\par
the roads in order.'\par
'Thank you, my dear fellow!' said Bilbo. 'That really is a very great\par
relief to my mind.' And with that he fell fast asleep again.\par
The next day Gandalf and the hobbits took leave of Bilbo in his room, for\par
it was cold out of doors; and then they said farewell to Elrond and all his\par
household.\par
As Frodo stood upon the threshold, Elrond wished him a fair journey, and\par
blessed him, and he said:\par
'I think, Frodo, that maybe you will not need to come back, unless you\par
come very soon. For about this time of the year, when the leaves are gold\par
before they fall, look for Bilbo in the woods of the Shire. I shall be with\par
him.'\par
These words no one else heard, and Frodo kept them to himself.\par
_Chapter 7_\par
Homeward Bound\par
At last the hobbits had their faces turned towards home. They were eager\par
now to see the Shire again; but at first they rode only slowly, for Frodo had\par
been ill at ease. When they came to the Ford of Bruinen, he had halted, and\par
seemed loth to ride into the stream; and they noted that for a while his eyes\par
appeared not to see them or things about him. All that day he was silent. It\par
was the sixth of October.\par
'Are you in pain, Frodo?' said Gandalf quietly as he rode by Frodo's\par
side.\par
'Well, yes I am,' said Frodo. 'It is my shoulder. The wound aches, and\par
the memory of darkness is heavy on me. It was a year ago today.'\par
'Alas! there are some wounds that cannot be wholly cured,' said Gandalf.\par
'I fear it may be so with mine,' said Frodo. 'There is no real going\par
back. Though I may come to the Shire, it will not seem the same; for I shall\par
not be the same. I am wounded with knife, sting, and tooth, and a long burden.\par
Where shall I find rest?'\par
Gandalf did not answer.\par
By the end of the next day the pain and unease had passed, and Frodo was\par
merry again, as merry as if he did not remember the blackness of the day\par
before. After that the journey went well, and the days went quickly by; for\par
they rode at leisure, and often they lingered in the fair woodlands where the\par
leaves were red and yellow in the autumn sun. At length they came to\par
Weathertop; and it was then drawing towards evening and the shadow of the hill\par
lay dark on the road. Then Frodo begged them to hasten, and he would not look\par
towards the hill, but rode through its shadow with head bowed and cloak drawn\par
close about him. That night the weather changed, and a wind came from the West\par
laden with rain, and it blew loud and chill, and the yellow leaves whirled\par
like birds in the air. When they came to the Chetwood already the boughs were\par
almost bare, and a great curtain of rain veiled Bree Hill from their sight.\par
So it was that near the end of a wild and wet evening in the last days of\par
October the five travellers rode up the climbing road and came to the Southgate\par
of Bree. It was locked fast; and the rain blew in their faces, and in the\par
darkening sky low clouds went hurrying by, and their hearts sank a little, for\par
they had expected more welcome.\par
When they had called many times, at last the Gate-keeper came out, and\par
they saw that he carried a great cudgel. He looked at them with fear and\par
suspicion; but when he saw that Gandalf was there, and that his companions\par
were hobbits, in spite of their strange gear, then he brightened and wished\par
them welcome.\par
'Come in!' he said, unlocking the gate. 'We won't stay for news out here\par
in the cold and the wet, a ruffianly evening. But old Barley will no doubt\par
give you a welcome at _The Pony_, and there you'll hear all there is to hear.'\par
'And there you'll hear later all that we say, and more,' laughed Gandalf.\par
'How is Harry?'\par
The Gate-keeper scowled. 'Gone,' he said. 'But you'd best ask Barliman.\par
Good evening!'\par
'Good evening to you!' they said, and passed through; and then they\par
noticed that behind the hedge at the road-side a long low hut had been built,\par
and a number of men had come out and were staring at them over the fence. When\par
they came to Bill Ferny's house they saw that the hedge there was tattered and\par
unkempt, and the windows were all boarded up.\par
'Do you think you killed him with that apple, Sam?' said Pippin.\par
'I'm not so hopeful, Mr. Pippin,' said Sam. 'But I'd like to know what\par
became of that poor pony. He's been on my mind many a time and the wolves\par
howling and all.'\par
At last they came to _The Prancing Pony_, and that at least looked\par
outwardly unchanged; and there were lights behind the red curtains in the\par
lower windows. They rang the bell, and Nob came to the door, and opened it a\par
crack and peeped through; and when he saw them standing under the lamp he gave\par
a cry of surprise.\par
'Mr. Butterbur! Master!' he shouted. 'They've come back!'\par
'Oh have they? I'll learn them,' came Butterbur's voice, and out he came\par
with a rush, and he had a club in his hand. But when he saw who they were he\par
stopped short, and the black scowl on his face changed to wonder and delight.\par
'Nob, you woolly-pated ninny!' he cried. 'Can't you give old friends\par
their names? You shouldn't go scaring me like that, with times as they are.\par
Well, well! And where have you come from? I never expected to see any of you\par
folk again, and that's a fact: going off into the Wild with that Strider, and\par
all those Black Men about. But I'm right glad to see you, and none more than\par
Gandalf. Come in! Come in! The same rooms as \endash  before? They're free. Indeed\par
most rooms are empty these days, as I'll not hide from you, for you'll find it\par
out soon enough. And I'll see what can be done about supper, as soon as may\par
be; but I'm short-handed at present. Hey, Nob you slowcoach! Tell Bob! Ah, but\par
there I'm forgetting, Bob's gone: goes home to his folk at nightfall now.\par
Well, take the guests' ponies to the stables, Nob! And you'll be taking your\par
horse to his stable yourself Gandalf; I don't doubt. A fine beast, as I said\par
when I first set eyes on him. Well, come in! Make yourselves at home!'\par
Mr. Butterbur had at any rate not changed his manner of talking, and\par
still seemed to live in his old breathless bustle. And yet there was hardly\par
anybody about, and all was quiet; from the Common Room there came a low murmur\par
of no more than two or three voices. And seen closer in the light of two\par
candles that he lit and carried before them the landlord's face looked rather\par
wrinkled and careworn.\par
He led them down the passage to the parlour that they had used on that\par
strange night more than a year ago; and they followed him, a little\par
disquieted, for it seemed plain to them that old Barliman was putting a brave\par
face on some trouble. Things were not what they had been. But they said\par
nothing, and waited.\par
As they expected Mr. Butterbur came to the parlour after supper to see if\par
all had been to their liking. As indeed it had: no change for the worse had\par
yet come upon the beer or the victuals at _The Pony_ at any rate. 'Now I won't\par
make so bold as to suggest you should come to the Common Room tonight,' said\par
Butterbur. 'You'll be tired; and there isn't many folk there this evening,\par
anyway. But if you could spare me half an hour before you go to your beds, I\par
would dearly like to have some talk with you, quiet-like by ourselves.'\par
'That is just what we should like, too,' said Gandalf. 'We are not tired.\par
We have been taking things easy. We were wet, cold and hungry, but all that\par
you have cured. Come, sit down! And if you have any pipe-weed, we'll bless\par
you.'\par
'Well, if you'd called for anything else, I'd have been happier,' said\par
Butterbur. 'That's just a thing that we're short of, seeing how we've only got\par
what we grow ourselves, and that's not enough. There's none to be had from the\par
Shire these days. But I'll do what I can.'\par
When he came back he brought them enough to last them for a day or two, a\par
wad of uncut leaf. 'Southlinch,' he said, 'and the best we have; but not the\par
match of Southfarthing, as I've always said though I'm all for Bree in most\par
matters, begging your pardon.'\par
They put him in a large chair by the wood-fire, and Gandalf sat on the\par
other side of the hearth, and the hobbits in low chairs between them; and then\par
they talked for many times half an hour, and exchanged all such news as Mr.\par
Butterbur wished to hear or give. Most of the things which they had to tell\par
were a mere wonder and bewilderment to their host, and far beyond his vision;\par
and they brought forth few comments other than: 'You don't say; often repeated\par
in defiance of the evidence of Mr. Butterbur's own ears. 'You don't say, Mr.\par
Baggins, or is it Mr. Underhill? I'm getting so mixed up. You don't say,\par
Master Gandalf! Well I never! Who'd have thought it in our times!'\par
But he did say much on his own account. Things were far from well, he\par
would say. Business was not even fair, it was downright bad. 'No one comes\par
nigh Bree now from Outside,' he said. 'And the inside folks, they stay at home\par
mostly and keep their doors barred. It all comes of those newcomers and\par
gangrels that began coming up the Greenway last year, as you may remember; but\par
more came later. Some were just poor bodies running away from trouble; but\par
most were bad men, full o' thievery and mischief. And there was trouble right\par
here in Bree, bad trouble. Why, we had a real set-to, and there were some folk\par
killed, killed dead! If you'll believe me.'\par
'I will indeed,' said Gandalf. 'How many?'\par
'Three and two,' said Butterbur, referring to the big folk and the\par
little. 'There was poor Mat Heathertoes, and Rowlie Appledore, and little Tom\par
Pickthorn from over the Hill; and Willie Banks from up-away, and one of the\par
Underhills from Staddle: all good fellows, and they're missed. And Harry\par
Goatleaf that used to be on the West-gate, and that Bill Ferny, they came in\par
on the strangers' side, and they've gone off with them; and it's my belief\par
they let them in. On the night of the fight, I mean. And that was after we\par
showed them the gates and pushed them out: before the year's end, that was;\par
and the fight was early in the New Year, after the heavy snow we had.\par
'And now they're gone for robbers and live outside, hiding in the woods\par
beyond Archet, and out in the wilds north-away. It's like a bit of the bad old\par
times tales tell of, I say. It isn't safe on the road and nobody goes far, and\par
folk lock up early. We have to keep watchers all round the fence and put a lot\par
of men on the gates at nights.'\par
'Well, no one troubled us,' said Pippin, 'and we came along slowly, and\par
kept no watch. We thought we'd left all trouble behind us.'\par
'Ah, that you haven't, Master, more's the pity,' said Butterbur. 'But\par
it's no wonder they left you alone. They wouldn't go for armed folk, with\par
swords and helmets and shields and all. Make them think twice, that would. And\par
I must say it put me aback a bit when I saw you.'\par
Then the hobbits suddenly realized that people had looked at them with\par
amazement not out of surprise at their return so much as in wonder at their\par
gear. They themselves had become so used to warfare and to riding in wellarrayed\par
companies that they had quite forgotten that the bright mail peeping\par
from under their cloaks, and the helms of Gondor and the Mark, and the fair\par
devices on their shields, would seem outlandish in their own country. And\par
Gandalf, too, was now riding on his tall grey horse, all clad in white with a\par
great mantle of blue and silver over all, and the long sword Glamdring at his\par
side.\par
Gandalf laughed. 'Well, well,' he said, 'if they are afraid of just five\par
of us, then we have met worse enemies on our travels. But at any rate they\par
will give you peace at night while we stay.'\par
'How long will that be?' said Butterbur. 'I'll not deny we should be glad\par
to have you about for a bit. You see, we're not used to such troubles; and the\par
Rangers have all gone away, folk tell me. I don't think we've rightly\par
understood till now what they did for us. For there's been worse than robbers\par
about. Wolves were howling round the fences last winter. And there's dark\par
shapes in the woods, dreadful things that it makes the blood run cold to think\par
of. It's been very disturbing, if you understand me.'\par
'I expect it has,' said Gandalf. 'Nearly all lands have been disturbed\par
these days, very disturbed. But cheer up, Barliman! You have been on the edge\par
of very great troubles, and I am only glad to hear that you have not been\par
deeper in. But better times are coming. Maybe, better than any you remember.\par
The Rangers have returned. We came back with them. And there is a king again,\par
Barliman. He will soon be turning his mind this way.\par
'Then the Greenway will be opened again, and his messengers will come\par
north, and there will be comings and goings, and the evil things will be\par
driven out of the waste-lands. Indeed the waste in time will be waste no\par
longer, and there will be people and fields where once there was wilderness.'\par
Mr. Butterbur shook his head. 'If there's a few decent respectable folk\par
on the roads, that won't do no harm,' he said. 'But we don't want no more\par
rabble and ruffians. And we don't want no outsiders at Bree, nor near Bree at\par
all. We want to be let alone. I don't want a whole crowd o' strangers camping\par
here and settling there and tearing up the wild country.'\par
'You will be let alone, Barliman,' said Gandalf. 'There is room enough\par
for realms between Isen and Greyflood, or along the shore lands south of the\par
Brandywine, without any one living within many days' ride of Bree. And many\par
folk used to dwell away north, a hundred miles or more from here, at the far\par
end of the Greenway: on the North Downs or by Lake Evendim.'\par
'Up away by Deadmen's Dike?' said Butterbur, looking even more dubious.\par
'That's haunted land, they say. None but a robber would go there.'\par
'The Rangers go there,' said Gandalf. 'Deadmen's Dike, you say. So it has\par
been called for long years; but its right name, Barliman, is Fornost Erain,\par
Norbury of the Kings. And the King will come there again one day; and then\par
you'll have some fair folk riding through.'\par
'Well, that sounds more hopeful, I'll allow,' said Butterbur. 'And it\par
will be good for business, no doubt. So long as he lets Bree alone.'\par
'He will,' said Gandalf. 'He knows it and loves it.'\par
'Does he now?' said Butterbur looking puzzled. 'Though I'm sure I don't\par
know why he should, sitting in his big chair up in his great castle, hundreds\par
of miles away. And drinking wine out of a golden cup, I shouldn't wonder.\par
What's _The Pony_ to him, or mugs o' beer? Not but what my beer's good,\par
Gandalf. It's been uncommon good, since you came in the autumn of last year\par
and put a good word on it. And that's been a comfort in trouble, I will say.'\par
'Ah!' said Sam. 'But he says your beer is always good.'\par
'He says?'\par
'Of course he does. He's Strider. The chief of the Rangers. Haven't you\par
got that into your head yet?'\par
It went in at last, and Butterbur's face was a study in wonder. The eyes\par
in his broad face grew round, and his mouth opened wide, and he gasped.\par
'Strider!' he exclaimed when he got back his breath. 'Him with a crown and all\par
and a golden cup! Well, what are we coming to?'\par
'Better times, for Bree at any rate,' said Gandalf.\par
'I hope so, I'm sure,' said Butterbur. 'Well, this has been the nicest\par
chat I've had in a month of Mondays. And I'll not deny that I'll sleep easier\par
tonight and with a lighter heart. You've given me a powerful lot to think\par
over, but I'll put that off until tomorrow. I'm for bed, and I've no doubt\par
you'll be glad of your beds too. Hey, Nob!' he called, going to the door.\par
'Nob, you slowcoach!'\par
'Now!' he said to himself, slapping his forehead. 'Now what does that\par
remind me of?'\par
'Not another letter you've forgotten. I hope, Mr. Butterbur?' said Merry.\par
'Now, now, Mr. Brandybuck, don't go reminding me of that! But there,\par
you've broken my thought. Now where was I? Nob, stables, ah! that was it. I've\par
something that belongs to you. If you recollect Bill Ferny and the\par
horsethieving: his pony as you bought, well, it's here. Come back all of\par
itself, it did. But where it had been to you know better than me. It was as\par
shaggy as an old dog and as lean as a clothes-rail, but it was alive. Nob's\par
looked after it.'\par
'What! My Bill?' cried Sam. 'Well, I was born lucky, whatever my gaffer\par
may say. There's another wish come true! Where is he?' Sam would not go to bed\par
until he had visited Bill in his stable.\par
The travellers stayed in Bree all the next day, and Mr. Butterbur could\par
not complain of his business next evening at any rate. Curiosity overcame all\par
fears, and his house was crowded. For a while out of politeness the hobbits\par
visited the Common Room in the evening and answered a good many questions.\par
Bree memories being retentive, Frodo was asked many times if he had written\par
his book.\par
'Not yet,' he answered. 'I am going home now to put my notes in order.'\par
He promised to deal with the amazing events at Bree, and so give a bit of\par
interest to a book that appeared likely to treat mostly of the remote and less\par
important affairs 'away south'.\par
Then one of the younger folk called for a song. But at that a hush fell,\par
and he was frowned down, and the call was not repeated. Evidently there was no\par
wish for any uncanny events in the Common Room again.\par
No trouble by day, nor any sound by night, disturbed the peace of Bree\par
while the travellers remained there; but the next morning they got up early,\par
for as the weather was still rainy they wished to reach the Shire before\par
night, and it was a long ride. The Bree folk were all out to see them off, and\par
were in merrier mood than they had been for a year; and those who had not seen\par
the strangers in all their gear before gaped with wonder at them: at Gandalf\par
with his white beard, and the light that seemed to gleam from him, as if his\par
blue mantle was only a cloud over sunshine; and at the four hobbits like\par
riders upon errantry out of almost forgotten tales. Even those who had laughed\par
at all the talk about the King began to think there might be some truth in it.\par
'Well, good luck on your road, and good luck to your home-coming! said\par
Mr. Butterbur. 'I should have warned you before that all's not well in the\par
Shire neither, if what we hear is true. Funny goings on, they say. But one\par
thing drives out another, and I was full of my own troubles. But if I may be\par
so bold, you've come back changed from your travels, and you look now like\par
folk as can deal with troubles out of hand. I don't doubt you'll soon set all\par
to rights. Good luck to you! And the oftener you come back the better I'll be\par
pleased.'\par
They wished him farewell and rode away, and passed through the West-gate\par
and on towards the Shire. Bill the pony was with them, and as before he had a\par
good deal of baggage, but he trotted along beside Sam and seemed well content.\par
'I wonder what old Barliman was hinting at,' said Frodo.\par
'I can guess some of it,' said Sam gloomily. 'What I saw in the Mirror:\par
trees cut down and all, and my old gaffer turned out of the Row. I ought to\par
have hurried back quicker.'\par
'And something's wrong with the Southfarthing evidently,' said Merry.\par
'There's a general shortage of pipe-weed.'\par
'Whatever it is,' said Pippin, 'Lotho will be at the bottom of it: you\par
can be sure of that.'\par
'Deep in, but not at the bottom,' said Gandalf. 'You have forgotten\par
Saruman. He began to take an interest in the Shire before Mordor did.'\par
'Well, we've got you with us,' said Merry, 'so things will soon be\par
cleared up.'\par
'I am with you at present,' said Gandalf, 'but soon I shall not be. I am\par
not coming to the Shire. You must settle its affairs yourselves; that is what\par
you have been trained for. Do you not yet understand? My time is over: it is\par
no longer my task to set things to rights, nor to help folk to do so. And as\par
for you, my dear friends, you will need no help. You are grown up now. Grown\par
indeed very high; among the great you are, and I have no longer any fear at\par
all for any of you.\par
'But if you would know, I am turning aside soon. I am going to have a\par
long talk with Bombadil: such a talk as I have not had in all my time. He is a\par
moss-gatherer, and I have been a stone doomed to rolling. But my rolling days\par
are ending, and now we shall have much to say to one another.'\par
In a little while they came to the point on the East Road where they had\par
taken leave of Bombadil; and they hoped and half expected to see him standing\par
there to greet them as they went by. But there was no sign of him; and there\par
was a grey mist on the Barrow-downs southwards, and a deep veil over the Old\par
Forest far away.\par
They halted and Frodo looked south wistfully. 'I should dearly like to\par
see the old fellow again,' he said. 'I wonder how he is getting on?'\par
'As well as ever, you may be sure,' said Gandalf. 'Quite untroubled and I\par
should guess, not much interested in anything that we have done or seen,\par
unless perhaps in our visits to the Ents. There may be a time later for you to\par
go and see him. But if I were you, I should press on now for home, or you will\par
not come to the Brandywine Bridge before the gates are locked.'\par
'But there aren't any gates,' said Merry, 'not on the Road; you know that\par
quite well. There's the Buckland Gate, of course; but they'll let me through\par
that at any time.'\par
'There weren't any gates, you mean,' said Gandalf. 'I think you will find\par
some now. And you might have more trouble even at the Buckland Gate than you\par
think. But you'll! manage all right. Good-bye dear friends! Not for the last\par
time, not yet. Good-bye!'\par
He turned Shadowfax off the Road, and the great horse leaped the green\par
dike that here ran beside it; and then at a cry from Gandalf he was gone,\par
racing towards the Barrow-downs like a wind from the North.\par
'Well here we are, just the four of us that started out together,' said\par
Merry. 'We have left all the rest behind, one after another. It seems almost\par
like a dream that has slowly faded.'\par
'Not to me,' said Frodo. 'To me it feels more like falling asleep again.'\par
_Chapter 8_\par
The Scouring of the Shire\par
It was after nightfall when, wet and tired, the travellers came at last\par
to the Brandywine, and they found the way barred. At either end of the Bridge\par
there was a great spiked gate; and on the further side of the river they could\par
see that some new houses had been built: two-storeyed with narrow straightsided\par
windows, bare and dimly lit, all very gloomy and un-Shirelike.\par
They hammered on the outer gate and called, but there was at first no\par
answer; and then to their surprise someone blew a horn, and the lights in the\par
windows went out. A voice shouted in the dark:\par
'Who's that? Be off! You can't come in: Can't you read the notice: _No\par
admittance between sundown and sunrise_?'\par
'Of course we can't read the notice in the dark.' Sam shouted back. 'And\par
if hobbits of the Shire are to be kept out in the wet on a night like this,\par
I'll tear down your notice when I find it.'\par
At that a window slammed, and a crowd of hobbits with lanterns poured out\par
of the house on the left. They opened the further gate, and some came over the\par
bridge. When they saw the travellers they seemed frightened.\par
'Come along!' said Merry, recognizing one of the hobbits. 'If you don't\par
know me, Hob Hayward, you ought to. I am Merry Brandybuck, and I should like\par
to know what all this is about, and what a Bucklander like you is doing here.\par
You used to be on the Hay Gate.'\par
'Bless me! It's Master Merry, to be sure, and all dressed up for\par
fighting!' said old Hob. 'Why, they said you was dead! Lost in the Old Forest\par
by all accounts. I'm pleased to see you alive after all!'\par
'Then stop gaping at me through the bars, and open the gate!' said Merry.\par
'I'm sorry, Master Merry, but we have orders.'\par
'Whose orders?'\par
'The Chief's up at Bag End.'\par
'Chief? Chief? Do you mean Mr. Lotho?' said Frodo.\par
'I suppose so, Mr. Baggins; but we have to say just "the Chief"\par
nowadays.'\par
'Do you indeed!' said Frodo. 'Well, I am glad he has dropped the Baggins\par
at any rate. But it is evidently high time that the family dealt with him and\par
put him in his place.'\par
A hush fell on the hobbits beyond the gate. 'It won't do no good talking\par
that way,' said one. 'He'll get to hear of it. And if you make so much noise,\par
you'll wake the Chief's Big Man.'\par
'We shall wake him up in a way that will surprise him,' said Merry. 'If\par
you mean that your precious Chief has been hiring ruffians out of the wild,\par
then we've not come back too soon.' He sprang from his pony, and seeing the\par
notice in the light of the lanterns, he tore it down and threw it over the\par
gate. The hobbits backed away and made no move to open it. 'Come on, Pippin!'\par
said Merry. 'Two is enough.'\par
Merry and Pippin climbed the gate, and the hobbits fled. Another horn\par
sounded. Out of the bigger house on the right a large heavy figure appeared\par
against a light in the doorway.\par
'What's all this,' he snarled as he came forward. 'Gate-breaking? You\par
clear out, or I'll break your filthy little necks!' Then he stopped, for he\par
had caught the gleam of swords.\par
'Bill Ferny,' said Merry, 'if you don't open that gate in ten seconds,\par
you'll regret it. I shall set steel to you, if you don't obey. And when you\par
have opened the gates you will go through them and never return. You are a\par
ruffian and a highway-robber.'\par
Bill Ferny flinched and shuffled to the gate and unlocked it. 'Give me\par
the key!' said Merry. But the ruffian flung it at his head and then darted out\par
into the darkness. As he passed the ponies one of them let fly with his heels\par
and just caught him as he ran. He went off with a yelp into the night and was\par
never heard of again.\par
'Neat work, Bill,' said Sam, meaning the pony.\par
'So much for your Big Man,' said Merry. 'We'll see the Chief later. In\par
the meantime we want a lodging for the night, and as you seem to have pulled\par
down the Bridge Inn and built this dismal place instead, you'll have to put us\par
up.'\par
'I am sorry, Mr. Merry,' said Hob, 'but it isn't allowed.'\par
'What isn't allowed?'\par
Taking in folk off-hand like and eating extra food, and all that, said\par
Hob.\par
'What's the matter with the place?' said Merry. 'Has it been a bad year,\par
or what? I thought it had been a fine summer and harvest.'\par
'Well no, the year's been good enough,' said Hob. 'We grows a lot of\par
food, but we don't rightly know what becomes of it. It's all these\par
"gatherers" and "sharers", I reckon, going round counting and measuring and\par
taking off to storage. They do more gathering than sharing, and we never see\par
most of the stuff again.'\par
'Oh come!' said Pippin yawning. 'This is all too tiresome for me tonight.\par
We've got food in our bags. Just give us a room to lie down in. It'll be\par
better than many places I have seen.'\par
The hobbits at the gate still seemed ill at ease, evidently some rule or\par
other was being broken; but there was no gainsaying four such masterful\par
travellers, all armed, and two of them uncommonly large and strong-looking.\par
Frodo ordered the gates to be locked again. There was some sense at any rate\par
in keeping a guard, while ruffians were still about. Then the four companions\par
went into the hobbit guard-house and made themselves as comfortable as they\par
could. It was a bare and ugly place, with a mean little grate that would not\par
allow a good fire. In the upper rooms were little rows of hard beds, and on\par
every wall there was a notice and a list of Rules. Pippin tore them down.\par
There was no beer and very little food, but with what the travellers brought\par
and shared out they all made a fair meal; and Pippin broke Rule 4 by putting\par
most of next day's allowance of wood on the fire.\par
'Well now, what about a smoke, while you tell us what has been happening\par
in the Shire?' he said.\par
'There isn't no pipe-weed now,' said Hob; 'at least only for the Chief's\par
men. All the stocks seem to have gone. We do hear that waggon-loads of it went\par
away down the old road out of the Southfarthing, over Sarn Ford way. That\par
would be the end o' last year, after you left. But it had been going away\par
quietly before that, in a small way. That Lotho-'\par
'Now you shut up, Hob Hayward!' cried several of the others. 'You know\par
talk o' that sort isn't allowed. The Chief will hear of it, and we'll all be\par
in trouble.'\par
'He wouldn't hear naught, if some of you here weren't sneaks,' rejoined\par
Hob hotly.\par
'All right, all right!' said Sam. "That's quite enough. I don't want to\par
hear no more. No welcome, no beer, no smoke, and a lot of rules and orc-talk\par
instead. I hoped to have a rest, but I can see there's work and trouble ahead.\par
Let's sleep and forget it till morning!'\par
The new 'Chief' evidently had means of getting news. It was a good forty\par
miles from the Bridge to Bag End, but someone made the journey in a hurry. So\par
Frodo and his friends soon discovered.\par
They had not made any definite plans, but had vaguely thought of going\par
down to Crickhollow together first, and resting there a bit. But now, seeing\par
what things were like, they decided to go straight to Hobbiton. So the next\par
day they set out along the Road and jogged along steadily. The wind had\par
dropped but the sky was grey. The land looked rather sad and forlorn; but it\par
was after all the first of November and the fag-end of Autumn. Still there\par
seemed an unusual amount of burning going on, and smoke rose from many points\par
round about. A great cloud of it was going up far away in the direction of the\par
Woody End.\par
As evening fell they were drawing near to Frogmorton, a village right on\par
the Road, about twenty-two miles from the Bridge. There they meant to stay the\par
night; _The Floating Log_ at Frogmorton was a good inn. But as they came to\par
the east end of the village they met a barrier with a large board saying NO\par
ROAD; and behind it stood a large band of Shirriffs with staves in their hands\par
and feathers in their caps, looking both important and rather scared.\par
'What's all this?' said Frodo, feeling inclined to laugh.\par
This is what it is, Mr. Baggins, said the leader of the Shirriffs, a twofeather\par
hobbit: 'You're arrested for Gate-breaking, and Tearing up of Rules,\par
and Assaulting Gate-keepers, and Trespassing, and Sleeping in Shire-buildings\par
without Leave, and Bribing Guards with Food.'\par
'And what else?' said Frodo.\par
'That'll do to go on with,' said the Shirriff-leader.\par
'I can add some more, if you like it,' said Sam. 'Calling your Chief\par
Names, Wishing to punch his Pimply Face, and Thinking you Shirriffs look a lot\par
of Tom-fools.'\par
'There now, Mister, that'll do. It's the Chief's orders that you're to\par
come along quiet. We're going to take you to Bywater and hand you over to the\par
Chief's Men; and when he deals with your case you can have your say. But if\par
you don't want to stay in the Lockholes any longer than you need, I should cut\par
the say short, if I was you.'\par
To the discomfiture of the Shirriffs Frodo and his companions all roared\par
with laughter. 'Don't be absurd!' said Frodo. 'I am going where I please, and\par
in my own time. I happen to be going to Bag End on business, but if you insist\par
on going too, well that is your affair.'\par
'Very well, Mr. Baggins,' said the leader, pushing the barrier aside.\par
'But don't forget I've arrested you.'\par
'I won't,' said Frodo. 'Never. But I may forgive you. Now I am not going\par
any further today, so if you'll kindly escort me to _The Floating Log_, I'll\par
be obliged.'\par
'I can't do that, Mr. Baggins. The inn's closed. There's a Shirriff-house\par
at the far end of the village. I'll take you there. '\par
'All right,' said Frodo. 'Go on and we'll follow.'\par
Sam had been looking the Shirriffs up and down and had spotted one that\par
he knew. 'Hey, come here Robin Smallburrow!' he called. 'I want a word with\par
you.'\par
With a sheepish glance at his leader, who looked wrathful but did not\par
dare to interfere, Shirriff Smallburrow fell back and walked beside Sam, who\par
got down off his pony.\par
'Look here, Cock-robin!' said Sam. 'You're Hobbiton-bred and ought to\par
have more sense, coming a-waylaying Mr. Frodo and all. And what's all this\par
about the inn being closed?'\par
'They're all closed,' said Robin. 'The Chief doesn't hold with beer.\par
Leastways that is how it started. But now I reckon it's his Men that has it\par
all. And he doesn't hold with folk moving about; so if they will or they must,\par
then they has to go to the Shirriff-house and explain their business.'\par
'You ought to be ashamed of yourself having anything to do with such\par
nonsense,' said Sam. 'You used to like the inside of an inn better than the\par
outside yourself. You were always popping in, on duty or off.'\par
'And so I would be still, Sam, if I could. But don't be hard on me. What\par
can I do? You know how I went for a Shirriff seven years ago, before any of\par
this began. Gave me a chance of walking round the country and seeing folk, and\par
hearing the news, and knowing where the good beer was. But now it's\par
different.'\par
'But you can give it up, stop Shirriffing, if it has stopped being a\par
respectable job,' said Sam.\par
'We're not allowed to,' said Robin.\par
'If I hear _not allowed_ much oftener,' said Sam, 'I'm going to get\par
angry.'\par
'Can't say as I'd be sorry to see it,' said Robin lowering his voice. 'If\par
we all got angry together something might be done. But it's these Men, Sam,\par
the Chief's Men. He sends them round everywhere, and if any of us small folk\par
stand up for our rights, they drag him off to the Lockholes. They took old\par
Flourdumpling, old Will Whitfoot the Mayor, first, and they've taken a lot\par
more. Lately it's been getting worse. Often they beat 'em now.'\par
'Then why do you do their work far them?' said Sam angrily. 'Who sent you\par
to Frogmorton?'\par
'No one did. We stay here in the big Shirriff-house. We're the First\par
Eastfarthing Troop now. There's hundreds of Shirriffs all told and they want\par
more, with all these new rules. Most of them are in it against their will, but\par
not all. Even in the Shire there are some as like minding other folk's\par
business and talking big. And there's worse than that: there's a few as do\par
spy-work for the Chief and his Men.'\par
'Ah! So that's how you had news of us, is it?'\par
'That's right. We aren't allowed to send by it now, but they use the old\par
Quick Post service, and keep special runners at different points. One came in\par
from Whitfurrows last night with a "secret message", and another took it on\par
from here. And a message came back this afternoon saying you was to be\par
arrested and taken to Bywater, not direct to the Lockholes. The Chief wants to\par
see you at once, evidently.'\par
'He won't be so eager when Mr. Frodo has finished with him,' said Sam.\par
The Shirriff-house at Frogmorton was as bad as the Bridge-house. It had\par
only one storey, but it had the same narrow windows, and it was built of ugly\par
pale bricks, badly laid. Inside it was damp and cheerless, and supper was\par
served on a long bare table that had not been scrubbed for weeks. The food\par
deserved no better setting. The travellers were glad to leave the place. It\par
was about eighteen miles to Bywater, and they set off at ten o'clock in the\par
morning. They would have started earlier, only the delay so plainly annoyed\par
the Shirriff-leader. The west wind had shifted northward and it was turning\par
colder, but the rain was gone.\par
It was rather a comic cavalcade that left the village, though the few\par
folk that came out to stare at the 'get-up' of the travellers did not seem\par
quite sure whether laughing was allowed. A dozen Shirriffs had been told off\par
as escort to the 'prisoners'; but Merry made them march in front, while Frodo\par
and his friends rode behind. Merry, Pippin, and Sam sat at their ease laughing\par
and talking and singing, while the Shirriffs stumped along trying to look\par
stern and important. Frodo, however, was silent and looked rather sad and\par
thoughtful.\par
The last person they passed was a sturdy old gaffer clipping a hedge.\par
'Hullo, hullo!' he jeered. 'Now who's arrested who?'\par
Two of the Shirriffs immediately left the party and went towards him.\par
'Leader!' said Merry. 'Order your fellows back to their places at once, if you\par
don't want me to deal with them!'\par
The two hobbits at a sharp word from the leader came back sulkily. 'Now\par
get on!' said Merry, and after that the travellers saw to it that their\par
ponies' pace was quick enough to push the Shirriffs along as fast as they\par
could go. The sun came out, and in spite of the chilly wind they were soon\par
puffing and sweating.\par
At the Three-Farthing Stone they gave it up. They had done nearly\par
fourteen miles with only one rest at noon. It was now three o'clock. They were\par
hungry and very footsore and they could not stand the pace.\par
'Well, come along in your own time!' said Merry. 'We are going on.'\par
'Good-bye, Cock-robin!' said Sam. 'I'll wait for you outside _The Green\par
Dragon_, if you haven't forgotten where that is. Don't dawdle on the way!'\par
'You're breaking arrest, that's what you're doing,' said the leader\par
ruefully, 'and I can't be answerable.'\par
'We shall break a good many things yet, and not ask you to answer ' said\par
Pippin. 'Good luck to you!'\par
The travellers trotted on, and as the sun began to sink towards the White\par
Downs far away on the western horizon they came to Bywater by its wide pool;\par
and there they had their first really painful shock. This was Frodo and Sam's\par
own country, and they found out now that they cared about it more than any\par
other place in the world. Many of the houses that they had known were missing.\par
Some seemed to have been burned down. The pleasant row of old hobbit-holes in\par
the bank on the north side of the Pool were deserted, and their little gardens\par
that used to run down bright to the water's edge were rank with weeds. Worse,\par
there was a whole line of the ugly new houses all along Pool Side, where the\par
Hobbiton Road ran close to the bank. An avenue of trees had stood there. They\par
were all gone. And looking with dismay up the road towards Bag End they saw a\par
tall chimney of brick in the distance. It was pouring out black smoke into the\par
evening air.\par
Sam was beside himself. 'I'm going right on, Mr. Frodo!' he cried. 'I'm\par
going to see what's up. I want to find my gaffer.'\par
'We ought to find out first what we're in for, Sam,' said Merry. 'I guess\par
that the "Chief" will have a gang of ruffians handy. We had better find\par
someone who will tell us how things are round here.'\par
But in the village of Bywater all the houses and holes were shut, and no\par
one greeted them. They wondered at this, but they soon discovered the reason\par
of it. When they reached _The Green Dragon_, the last house on the Hobbiton\par
side, now lifeless and with broken windows, they were disturbed to see half a\par
dozen large ill-favoured Men lounging against the inn-wall; they were squinteyed\par
and sallow-faced.\par
'Like that friend of Bill Ferny's at Bree,' said Sam.\par
'Like many that I saw at Isengard,' muttered Merry.\par
The ruffians had clubs in their hands and horns by their belts, but they\par
had no other weapons, as far as could be seen. As the travellers rode up they\par
left the wall and walked into the road, blocking the way.\par
'Where d'you think you're going?' said one, the largest and most evillooking\par
of the crew. 'There's no road for you any further. And where are those\par
precious Shirriffs?'\par
'Coming along nicely,' said Merry. 'A little footsore, perhaps. We\par
promised to wait for them here.'\par
'Garn, what did I say?' said the ruffian to his mates. 'I told Sharkey it\par
was no good trusting those little fools. Some of our chaps ought to have been\par
sent.'\par
'And what difference would that have made, pray?' said Merry. 'We are not\par
used to footpads in this country, but we know how to deal with them.'\par
'Footpads, eh?' said the man: 'So that's your tone, is it? Change it, or\par
we'll change it for you. You little folk are getting too uppish. Don't you\par
trust too much in the Boss's kind heart. Sharkey's come now and he'll do what\par
Sharkey says.'\par
'And what may that be?' said Frodo quietly.\par
'This country wants waking up and setting to rights,' said the ruffian,\par
'and Sharkey's going to do it; and make it hard, if you drive him to it. You\par
need a bigger Boss. And you'll get one before the year is out, if there's any\par
more trouble. Then you'll learn a thing or two, you little rat-folk.'\par
'Indeed. I am glad to hear of your plans,' said Frodo. 'I am on my way to\par
call on Mr. Lotho, and he may be interested to hear of them too.'\par
The ruffian laughed. 'Lotho! He knows all right. Don't you worry. He'll\par
do what Sharkey says. Because if a Boss gives trouble, we can change him. See?\par
And if little folks try to push in where they're not wanted, we can put them\par
out of mischief. See?'\par
'Yes, I see,' said Frodo. 'For one thing, I see that you're behind the\par
times and the news here. Much has happened since you left the South. Your day\par
is over, and all other ruffians'. The Dark Tower has fallen, and there is a\par
King in Gondor. And Isengard has been destroyed, and your precious master is a\par
beggar in the wilderness. I passed him on the road. The King's messengers will\par
ride up the Greenway now not bullies from Isengard.'\par
The man stared at him and smiled. 'A beggar in the wilderness!' he\par
mocked. 'Oh, is he indeed? Swagger it, swagger it, my little cock-a-whoop. But\par
that won't stop us living in this fat little country where you have lazed long\par
enough. And' \endash  he snapped his fingers in Frodo's face \endash  'King's messengers!\par
That for them! When I see one, I'll take notice, perhaps.'\par
This was too much for Pippin. His thoughts went back to the Field of\par
Cormallen, and here was a squint-eyed rascal calling the Ring-bearer 'little\par
cock-a-whoop'. He cast back his cloak, flashed out his sword, and the silver\par
and sable of Gondor gleamed on him as he rode forward.\par
'I am a messenger of the King,' he said. 'You are speaking to the King's\par
friend, and one of the most renowned in all the lands of the West. You are a\par
ruffian and a fool. Down on your knees in the road and ask pardon, or I will\par
set this troll's bane in you!'\par
The sword glinted in the westering sun. Merry and Sam drew their swords\par
also and rode up to support Pippin; but Frodo did not move. The ruffians gave\par
back. Scaring Breeland peasants, and bullying bewildered hobbits, had been\par
their work. Fearless hobbits with bright swords and grim faces were a great\par
surprise. And there was a note in the voices of these newcomers that they had\par
not heard before. It chilled them with fear.\par
'Go!' said Merry. 'If you trouble this village again, you will regret\par
it.' The three hobbits came on, and then the ruffians turned and fled running\par
away up the Hobbiton Road; but they blew their horns as they ran.\par
'Well, we've come back none too soon,' said Merry.\par
'Not a day too soon. Perhaps too late, at any rate to save Lotho,' said\par
Frodo. 'Miserable fool, but I am sorry for him.'\par
'Save Lotho? Whatever do you mean?' said Pippin. 'Destroy him I should\par
say.'\par
'I don't think you quite understand things, Pippin,' said Frodo. 'Lotho\par
never meant things to come to this pass. He has been a wicked fool, but he's\par
caught now. The ruffians are on top, gathering, robbing and bullying, and\par
running or ruining things as they like, in his name. And not in his name even\par
for much longer. He's a prisoner in Bag End now, I expect, and very\par
frightened. We ought to try and rescue him.'\par
'Well I am staggered!' said Pippin. 'Of all the ends to our journey that\par
is the very last I should have thought of: to have to fight half-orcs and\par
ruffians in the Shire itself \endash  to rescue Lotho Pimple!'\par
'Fight?' said Frodo. 'Well, I suppose it may come to that. But remember:\par
there is to be no slaying of hobbits, not even if they have gone over to the\par
other side. Really gone over, I mean; not just obeying ruffians' orders\par
because they are frightened. No hobbit has ever killed another on purpose in\par
the Shire, and it is not to begin now. And nobody is to be killed at all, if\par
it can be helped. Keep your tempers and hold your hands to the last possible\par
moment!'\par
'But if there are many of these ruffians,' said Merry, 'it will certainly\par
mean fighting. You won't rescue Lotho, or the Shire, just by being shocked and\par
sad, my dear Frodo.'\par
'No,' said Pippin. 'It won't be so easy scaring them a second time. They\par
were taken by surprise. You heard that horn-blowing? Evidently there are other\par
ruffians near at hand. They'll be much bolder when there's more of them\par
together. We ought to think of taking cover somewhere for the night. After all\par
we're only four, even if we are armed.'\par
'I've an idea,' said Sam. 'Let's go to old Tom Cotton's down South Lane!\par
He always was a stout fellow. And he has a lot of lads that were all friends\par
of mine.'\par
'No!' said Merry. 'It's no good "getting under cover". That is just what\par
people have been doing, and just what these ruffians like. They will simply\par
come down on us in force, corner us, and then drive us out, or burn us in. No,\par
we have got to do something at once.'\par
'Do what?' said Pippin.\par
'Raise the Shire!' said Merry. 'Now! Wake all our people! They hate all\par
this, you can see: all of them except perhaps one or two rascals, and a few\par
fools that want to be important, but don't at all understand what is really\par
going on. But Shire-folk have been so comfortable so long they don't know what\par
to do. They just want a match, though, and they'll go up in fire. The Chief's\par
Men must know that. They'll try to stamp on us and put us out quick. We've\par
only got a very short time.\par
'Sam, you can make a dash for Cotton's farm, if you like. He's the chief\par
person round here, and the sturdiest. Come on! I am going to blow the horn of\par
Rohan, and give them all some music they have never heard before.'\par
They rode back to the middle of the village. There Sam turned aside and\par
galloped off down the lane that led south to Cotton's. He had not gone far\par
when he heard a sudden clear horn-call go up ringing into the sky. Far over\par
hill and field it echoed; and so compelling was that call that Sam himself\par
almost turned and dashed back. His pony reared and neighed.\par
'On, lad! On!' he cried. 'We'll be going back soon.'\par
Then he heard Merry change the note, and up went the Horn-cry of\par
Buckland, shaking the air.\par
_Awake! Awake! Fear, Fire, Foes! Awake!\par
Fire, Foes! Awake!_\par
Behind him Sam heard a hubbub of voices and a great din and slamming of\par
doors. In front of him lights sprang out in the gloaming; dogs barked; feet\par
came running. Before he got to the lane's end there was Farmer Cotton with\par
three of his lads, Young Tom, Jolly, and Nick, hurrying towards him. They had\par
axes in their hands, and barred the way.\par
'Nay! It's not one of them ruffians,' Sam heard the farmer say. 'It's a\par
hobbit by the size of it, but all dressed up queer. Hey!' he cried. 'Who are\par
you, and what's all this to-do?'\par
'It's Sam, Sam Gamgee. I've come back.'\par
Farmer Cotton came up close and stared at him in the twilight. 'Well!' he\par
exclaimed. 'The voice is right, and your face is no worse than it was, Sam.\par
But I should a' passed you in the street in that gear. You've been in foreign\par
parts, seemingly. We feared you were dead.'\par
'That I ain't!' said Sam. 'Nor Mr. Frodo. He's here and his friends. And\par
that's the to-do. They're raising the Shire. We're going to clear out these\par
ruffians, and their Chief too. We're starting now.'\par
'Good, good!' cried Farmer Cotton. 'So it's begun at last! I've been\par
itching for trouble all this year, but folks wouldn't help. And I've had the\par
wife and Rosie to think of. These ruffians don't stick at nothing. But come on\par
now, lads! Bywater is up! We must be in it!'\par
'What about Mrs. Cotton and Rosie?' said Sam. 'It isn't safe yet for them\par
to be left all alone.'\par
'My Nibs is with them. But you can go and help him, if you have a mind,'\par
said Farmer Cotton with a grin. Then he and his sons ran off towards the\par
village.\par
Sam hurried to the house. By the large round door at the top of the steps\par
from the wide yard stood Mrs. Cotton and Rosie, and Nibs in front of them\par
grasping a hay-fork.\par
'It's me!' shouted Sam as he trotted up. 'Sam Gamgee! So don't try\par
prodding me, Nibs. Anyway, I've a mail-shirt on me.'\par
He jumped down from his pony and went up the steps. They stared at him in\par
silence. 'Good evening, Mrs. Cotton!' he said. 'Hullo Rosie!'\par
'Hullo, Sam!' said Rosie. 'Where've you been I They said you were dead;\par
but I've been expecting you since the Spring. You haven't hurried have you?'\par
'Perhaps not,' said Sam abashed. 'But I'm hurrying now. We're setting\par
about the ruffians, and I've got to get back to Mr. Frodo. But I thought I'd\par
have a look and see how Mrs. Cotton was keeping, and you, Rosie.'\par
'We're keeping nicely, thank you,' said Mrs. Cotton. 'Or should be, if it\par
weren't for these thieving ruffians.'\par
'Well, be off with you!' said Rosie. 'If you've been looking after Mr.\par
Frodo all this while, what d'you want to leave him for, as soon as things look\par
dangerous?'\par
This was too much for Sam. It needed a week's answer, or none. He turned\par
away and mounted his pony. But as he started off, Rosie ran down the steps.\par
'I think you look fine, Sam,' she said. 'Go on now! But take care of\par
yourself, and come straight back as soon as you have settled the ruffians!'\par
When Sam got back he found the whole village roused. Already, apart from\par
many younger lads, more than a hundred sturdy hobbits were assembled with\par
axes, and heavy hammers, and long knives, and stout staves: and a few had\par
hunting-bows. More were still coming in from outlying farms.\par
Some of the village-folk had lit a large fire, just to enliven things,\par
and also because it was one of the things forbidden by the Chief. It burned\par
bright as night came on. Others at Merry's orders were setting up barriers\par
across the road at each end of the village. When the Shirriffs came up to the\par
lower one they were dumbfounded; but as soon as they saw how things were, most\par
of them took off their feathers and joined in the revolt. The others slunk\par
away.\par
Sam found Frodo and his friends by the fire talking to old Tom Cotton,\par
while an admiring crowd of Bywater folk stood round and stared.\par
'Well, what's the next move?' said Farmer Cotton.\par
'I can't say,' said Frodo, 'until I know more. How many of these ruffians\par
are there?'\par
'That's hard to tell,' said Cotton. 'They moves about and comes and goes.\par
There's sometimes fifty of them in their sheds up Hobbiton way; but they go\par
out from there roving round, thieving or "gathering" as they call it. Still\par
there's seldom less than a score round the Boss, as they names him. He's at\par
Bag End, or was; but he don't go outside the rounds now. No one s seen him at\par
all, in fact, for a week or two; but the Men don't let no one go near.'\par
'Hobbiton's not their only place, is it?' said Pippin.\par
'No, more's the pity,' said Cotton. 'There's a good few down south in\par
Longbottom and by Sarn Ford, I hear; and some more lurking in the Woody End;\par
and they've sheds at Waymeet. And then there's the Lockholes, as they call\par
'em: the old storage-tunnels at Michel Delving that they've made into prisons\par
for those as stand up to them. Still I reckon there's not above three hundred\par
of them in the Shire all told, and maybe less. We can master them, if we stick\par
together.'\par
'Have they got any weapons?' asked Merry.\par
'Whips, knives, and clubs, enough for their dirty work: that's all\par
they've showed so far,' said Cotton. 'But I dare say they've got other gear,\par
if it comes to fighting. Some have bows, anyway. They've shot one or two of\par
our folk.'\par
'There you are, Frodo!' said Merry. 'I knew we should have to fight.\par
Well, they started the killing.'\par
'Not exactly,' said Cotton. 'Leastways not the shooting. Tooks started\par
that. You see our dad Mr. Peregrin, he's never had no truck with this Lotho,\par
not from the beginning: said that if anyone was going to play the chief at\par
this time of day, it would be the right Thain of the Shire and no upstart. And\par
when Lotho sent his Men they got no change out of him. Tooks are lucky,\par
they've got those deep holes in the Green Hills, the Great Smials and all, and\par
the ruffians can't come at 'em; and they won't let the ruffians come on their\par
land. If they do, Tooks hunt 'em. Tooks shot three for prowling and robbing.\par
After that the ruffians turned nastier. And they keep a pretty close watch on\par
Tookland. No one gets in nor out of it now.'\par
'Good for the Tooks!' cried Pippin. 'But someone is going to get in\par
again, now. I am off to the Smials. Anyone coming with me to Tuckborough?'\par
Pippin rode off with half a dozen lads on ponies. 'See you soon!' he\par
cried. 'It's only fourteen miles or so over the fields. I'll bring you back an\par
army of Tooks in the morning.' Merry blew a horn-call after them as they rode\par
off into the gathering night. The people cheered.\par
'All the same,' said Frodo to all those who stood near, 'I wish for no\par
killing; not even of the ruffians, unless it must be done, to prevent them\par
from hurting hobbits.'\par
'All right!' said Merry. 'But we shall be having a visit from the\par
Hobbiton gang any time now, I think. They won't come just to talk things over.\par
We'll try to deal with them neatly, but we must be prepared for the worst. Now\par
I've got a plan.'\par
'Very good,' said Frodo. 'You make the arrangements.'\par
Just then some hobbits, who had been sent out towards Hobbiton, came\par
running in. 'They're coming!' they said. 'A score or more. But two have gone\par
off west across country.'\par
'To Waymeet, that'll be,' said Cotton, 'to fetch more of the gang. Well,\par
it's fifteen mile each way. We needn't trouble about them just yet.'\par
Merry hurried off to give orders. Farmer Cotton cleared the street,\par
sending everyone indoors, except the older hobbits who had weapons of some\par
sort. They had not long to wait. Soon they could hear loud voices, and then\par
the tramping of heavy feet. Presently a whole squad of the ruffians came down\par
the road. They saw the barrier and laughed. They did not imagine that there\par
was anything in this little land that would stand up to twenty of their kind\par
together.\par
The hobbits opened the barrier and stood aside. 'Thank you!' the Men\par
jeered. 'Now run home to bed before you're whipped.' Then they marched along\par
the street shouting: 'Put those lights out! Get indoors and stay there! Or\par
we'll take fifty of you to the Lockholes for a year. Get in! The Boss is\par
losing his temper.'\par
No one paid any heed to their orders; but as the ruffians passed, they\par
closed in quietly behind and followed them. When the Men reached the fire\par
there was Farmer Cotton standing all alone warming his hands.\par
'Who are you, and what d'you think you're doing?' said the ruffianleader.\par
Farmer Cotton looked at him slowly. 'I was just going to ask you that,'\par
he said. 'This isn't your country, and you're not wanted.'\par
'Well, you're wanted anyhow,' said the leader. 'We want you. Take him\par
lads! Lockholes for him, and give him something to keep him quiet!'\par
The Men took one step forward and stopped short. There rose a roar of\par
voices all round them, and suddenly they were aware that Farmer Cotton was not\par
all alone. They were surrounded. In the dark on the edge of the firelight\par
stood a ring of hobbits that had crept up out of the shadows. There was nearly\par
two hundred of them, all holding some weapon.\par
Merry stepped forward. 'We have met before,' he said to the leader, 'and\par
I warned you not to come back here. I warn you again: you are standing in the\par
light and you are covered by archers. If you lay a finger on this farmer, or\par
on anyone else, you will be shot at once. Lay down any weapons that you have!'\par
The leader looked round. He was trapped. But he was not scared, not now\par
with a score of his fellows to back him. He knew too little of hobbits to\par
understand his peril. Foolishly he decided to fight. It would be easy to break\par
out.\par
'At 'em lads!' he cried. 'Let 'em have it!'\par
With a long knife in his left hand and a club in the other he made a rush\par
at the ring, trying to burst out back towards Hobbiton. He aimed a savage blow\par
at Merry who stood in his way. He fell dead with four arrows in him:\par
That was enough for the others. They gave in. Their weapons were taken\par
from them, and they were roped together, and marched off to an empty hut that\par
they had built themselves, and there they were tied hand and foot, and locked\par
up under guard. The dead leader was dragged off and buried.\par
'Seems almost too easy after all, don't it?' said Cotton. 'I said we\par
could master them. But we needed a call. You came back in the nick o' time,\par
Mr. Merry.'\par
'There's more to be done still,' said Merry. 'If you're right in your\par
reckoning, we haven't dealt with a tithe of them yet. But it's dark now. I\par
think the next stroke must wait until morning. Then we must call on the\par
Chief.'\par
'Why not now?' said Sam. 'It's not much more than six o'clock. And I want\par
to see my gaffer. D'you know what's come of him, Mr. Cotton?'\par
'He's not too well, and not too bad, Sam,' said the farmer. 'They dug up\par
Bagshot Row, and that was a sad blow to him. He's in one of them new houses\par
that the Chief's Men used to build while they still did any work other than\par
burning and thieving: not above a mile from the end of Bywater. But he comes\par
around to me, when he gets a chance, and I see he's better fed than some of\par
the poor bodies. All against _The Rules_, of course. I'd have had him with me,\par
but that wasn't allowed.'\par
'Thank'ee indeed, Mr. Cotton, and I'll never forget it,' said Sam. 'But I\par
want to see him. That Boss and that Sharkey, as they spoke of, they might do a\par
mischief up there before the morning.'\par
'All right, Sam,' said Cotton. 'Choose a lad or two, and go and fetch him\par
to my house. You'll not have need to go near the old Hobbiton village over\par
Water. My Jolly here will show you.'\par
Sam went off. Merry arranged for look-outs round the village and guards\par
at the barriers during the night. Then he and Frodo went off with Farmer\par
Cotton. They sat with the family in the warm kitchen, and the Cottons asked a\par
few polite questions about their travels, but hardly listened to the answers:\par
they were far more concerned with events in the Shire.\par
'It all began with Pimple, as we call him,' said Farmer Cotton; 'and it\par
began as soon as you'd gone off, Mr. Frodo. He'd funny ideas had Pimple. Seems\par
he wanted to own everything himself, and then order other folk about. It soon\par
came out that he already did own a sight more than was good for him; and he\par
was always grabbing more, though where he got the money was a mystery: mills\par
and malt-houses and inns, and farms, and leaf-plantations. He'd already bought\par
Sandyman's mill before he came to Bag End, seemingly.\par
'Of course he started with a lot of property in the Southfarthing which\par
he had from his dad; and it seems he'd been selling a lot o' the best leaf,\par
and sending it away quietly for a year or two. But at the end o' last year he\par
began sending away loads of stuff, not only leaf. Things began to get short,\par
and winter coming on, too. Folk got angry, but he had his answer. A lot of\par
Men, ruffians mostly, came with great waggons, some to carry off the goods\par
south-away, and others to stay. And more came. And before we knew where we\par
were they were planted here and there all over the Shire, and were felling\par
trees and digging and building themselves sheds and houses just as they liked.\par
At first goods and damage was paid for by Pimple; but soon they began lording\par
it around and taking what they wanted.\par
'Then there was a bit of trouble, but not enough. Old Will the Mayor set\par
off for Bag End to protest, but he never got there. Ruffians laid hands on him\par
and took and locked him up in a hole in Michel Delving, and there he is now.\par
And after that, it would be soon after New Year, there wasn't no more Mayor,\par
and Pimple called himself Chief Shirriff, or just Chief, and did as he liked;\par
and if anyone got "uppish" as they called it, they followed Will. So things\par
went from bad to worse. There wasn't no smoke left, save for the Men; and the\par
Chief didn't hold with beer, save for his Men, and closed all the inns; and\par
everything except Rules got shorter and shorter, unless one could hide a bit\par
of one's own when the ruffians went round gathering stuff up "for fair\par
distribution": which meant they got it and we didn't, except for the leavings\par
which you could have at the Shirriff-houses, if you could stomach them. All\par
very bad. But since Sharkey came it's been plain ruination.'\par
'Who is this Sharkey?' said Merry. 'I heard one of the ruffians speak of\par
him.'\par
'The biggest ruffian o' the lot, seemingly,' answered Cotton. 'It was\par
about last harvest, end o' September maybe, that we first heard of him. We've\par
never seen him, but he's up at Bag End; and he's the real Chief now, I guess.\par
All the ruffians do what he says; and what he says is mostly hack, burn, and\par
ruin; and now it's come to killing. There's no longer even any bad sense in\par
it. They cut down trees and let 'em lie, they burn houses and build no more.\par
'Take Sandyman's mill now. Pimple knocked it down almost as soon as he\par
came to Bag End. Then he brought in a lot o' dirty-looking Men to build a\par
bigger one and fill it full o' wheels and outlandish contraptions. Only that\par
fool Ted was pleased by that, and he works there cleaning wheels for the Men,\par
where his dad was the Miller and his own master. Pimple's idea was to grind\par
more and faster, or so he said. He's got other mills like it. But you've got\par
to have grist before you can grind; and there was no more for the new mill to\par
do than for the old. But since Sharkey came they don't grind no more corn at\par
all. They're always a-hammering and a-letting out a smoke and a stench, and\par
there isn't no peace even at night in Hobbiton. And they pour out filth a\par
purpose; they've fouled all the lower Water and it's getting down into\par
Brandywine. If they want to make the Shire into a desert, they're going the\par
right way about it. I don't believe that fool of a Pimple's behind all this.\par
It's Sharkey, I say.'\par
'That's right!' put in Young Tom. 'Why, they even took Pimple's old ma,\par
that Lobelia, and he was fond of her, if no one else was. Some of the Hobbiton\par
folk, they saw it. She comes down the lane with her old umbrella. Some of the\par
ruffians were going up with a big cart.\par
' "Where be you a-going?" says she.\par
' "To Bag End," says they.\par
' "What for?" says she.\par
' "To put up some sheds for Sharkey," says they.\par
' "Who said you could?" says she.\par
' "Sharkey," says they. "So get out o' the road, old hagling!"\par
' "I'll give you Sharkey, you dirty thieving ruffians!" says she, and ups\par
with her umbrella and goes for the leader. near twice her size. So they took\par
her. Dragged her off to the Lockholes, at her age too. They've took others we\par
miss more, but there's no denying she showed more spirit than most.'\par
Into the middle of this talk came Sam, bursting in with his gaffer. Old\par
Gamgee did not look much older, but he was a little deafer.\par
'Good evening. Mr. Baggins!' he said. 'Glad indeed I am to see you safe\par
back. But I've a bone to pick with you, in a manner o' speaking, if I may make\par
so bold. You didn't never ought to have a' sold Bag End, as I always said.\par
That's what started all the mischief. And while you're been trapessing in\par
foreign parts, chasing Black Men up mountains from what my Sam says, though\par
what for he don't make clear, they've been and dug up Bagshot Row and ruined\par
my taters!'\par
'I am very sorry, Mr. Gamgee,' said Frodo. 'But now I've come back, I'll\par
do my best to make amends.'\par
'Well, you can't say fairer than that,' said the gaffer. 'Mr. _Frodo_\par
Baggins is a real gentlehobbit, I always have said, whatever you may think of\par
some others of the name, begging your pardon. And I hope my Sam's behaved\par
hisself and given satisfaction?'\par
'Perfect satisfaction, Mr. Gamgee,' said Frodo. 'Indeed, if you will\par
believe it, he's now one of the most famous people in all the lands, and they\par
are making songs about his deeds from here to the Sea and beyond the Great\par
River.' Sam blushed, but he looked gratefully at Frodo, for Rosie's eyes were\par
shining and she was smiling at him.\par
'It takes a lot o' believing,' said the gaffer, 'though I can see he's\par
been mixing in strange company. What's come of his weskit? I don't hold with\par
wearing ironmongery, whether it wears well or no.'\par
Farmer Cotton's household and all his guests were up early next morning.\par
Nothing had been heard in the night, but more trouble would certainly come\par
before the day was old. 'Seems as if none o' the ruffians were left up at Bag\par
End,' said Cotton; 'but the gang from Waymeet will be along any time now.'\par
After breakfast a messenger from the Tookland rode in. He was in high\par
spirits. 'The Thain has raised all our country,' he said, 'and the news is\par
going like fire all ways. The ruffians that were watching our land have fled\par
off south, those that escaped alive. The Thain has gone after them, to hold\par
off the big gang down that way; but he's sent Mr Peregrin back with all the\par
other folk he can spare.'\par
The next news was less good. Merry, who had been out all night, came\par
riding in about ten o'clock. 'There's a big band about four miles away,' he\par
said. 'They're coming along the road from Waymeet, but a good many stray\par
ruffians have joined up with them. There must be close on a hundred of them;\par
and they're fire-raising as they come. Curse them!'\par
'Ah! This lot won't stay to talk, they'll kill, if they can,' said Farmer\par
Cotton. 'If Tooks don't come sooner, we'd best get behind cover and shoot\par
without arguing. There's got to be some fighting before this is settled, Mr.\par
Frodo.'\par
The Tooks did come sooner. Before long they marched in, a hundred strong,\par
from Tuckborough and the Green Hills with Pippin at their head. Merry now had\par
enough sturdy hobbitry to deal with the ruffians. Scouts reported that they\par
were keeping close together. They knew that the countryside had risen against\par
them, and plainly meant to deal with the rebellion ruthlessly, at its centre\par
in Bywater. But however grim they, might be, they seemed to have no leader\par
among them who understood warfare. They came on without any precautions. Merry\par
laid his plans quickly.\par
The ruffians came tramping along the East Road, and without halting\par
turned up the Bywater Road, which ran for some way sloping up between high\par
banks with low hedges on top. Round a bend, about a furlong from the main\par
road, they met a stout barrier of old farm-carts upturned. That halted them.\par
At the same moment they became aware that the hedges on both sides, just above\par
their heads, were all lined with hobbits. Behind them other hobbits now pushed\par
out some more waggons that had been hidden in a field, and so blocked the way\par
back. A voice spoke to them from above.\par
'Well, you have walked into a trap,' said Merry. 'Your fellows from\par
Hobbiton did the same, and one is dead and the rest are prisoners. Lay down\par
your weapons! Then go back twenty paces and sit down. Any who try to break out\par
will be shot.'\par
But the ruffians could not now be cowed so easily. A few of them obeyed,\par
but were immediately set on by their fellows. A score or more broke back and\par
charged the waggons. Six were shot, but the remainder burst out, killing two\par
hobbits, and then scattering across country in the direction of the Woody End.\par
Two more fell as they ran. Merry blew a loud horn-call, and there were\par
answering calls from a distance.\par
'They won't get far,' said Pippin. 'All that country is alive with our\par
hunters now.'\par
Behind, the trapped Men in the lane, still about four score, tried to\par
climb the barrier and the banks, and the hobbits were obliged to shoot many of\par
them or hew them with axes. But many of the strongest and most desperate got\par
out on the west side, and attacked their enemies fiercely, being now more bent\par
on killing than escaping. Several hobbits fell, and the rest were wavering,\par
when Merry and Pippin, who were on the east side, came across and charged the\par
ruffians. Merry himself slew the leader, a great squint-eyed brute like a huge\par
orc. Then he drew his forces off, encircling the last remnant of the Men in a\par
wide ring of archers.\par
At last all was over. Nearly seventy of the ruffians lay dead on the\par
field, and a dozen were prisoners. Nineteen hobbits were killed, and some\par
thirty were wounded. The dead ruffians were laden on waggons and hauled off to\par
an old sand-pit nearby and there buried: in the Battle Pit, as it was\par
afterwards called. The fallen hobbits were laid together in a grave on the\par
hill-side, where later a great stone was set up with a garden about it. So\par
ended the Battle of Bywater, 1419, the last battle fought in the Shire, and\par
the only battle since the Greenfields, 1147, away up in the Northfarthing. In\par
consequence, though it happily cost very few lives, it has a chapter to itself\par
in the Red Book, and the names of all those who took part were made into a\par
Roll, and learned by heart by Shire-historians. The very considerable rise in\par
the fame and fortune of the Cottons dates from this time; but at the top of\par
the Roll in all accounts stand the names of Captains Meriadoc and Peregrin.\par
Frodo had been in the battle, but he had not drawn sword, and his chief\par
part had been to prevent the hobbits in their wrath at their losses, from\par
slaying those of their enemies who threw down their weapons. When the fighting\par
was over, and the later labours were ordered, Merry, Pippin, and Sam joined\par
him, and they rode back with the Cottons. They ate a late midday meal, and\par
then Frodo said with a sigh: 'Well, I suppose it is time now that we dealt\par
with the "Chief".'\par
'Yes indeed; the sooner the better,' said Merry. 'And don't be too\par
gentle! He's responsible for bringing in these ruffians, and for all the evil\par
they have done.'\par
Farmer Cotton collected an escort of some two dozen sturdy hobbits. 'For\par
it's only a guess that there is no ruffians left at Bag End,' he said. 'We\par
don't know.' Then they set out on foot. Frodo, Sam, Merry, and Pippin led the\par
way.\par
It was one of the saddest hours in their lives. The great chimney rose up\par
before them; and as they drew near the old village across the Water, through\par
rows of new mean houses along each side of the road, they saw the new mill in\par
all its frowning and dirty ugliness: a great brick building straddling the\par
stream, which it fouled with a steaming and stinking overflow. All along the\par
Bywater Road every tree had been felled.\par
As they crossed the bridge and looked up the Hill they gasped. Even Sam's\par
vision in the Mirror had not prepared him for what they saw. The Old Grange on\par
the west side had been knocked down, and its place taken by rows of tarred\par
sheds. All the chestnuts were gone. The banks and hedgerows were broken. Great\par
waggons were standing in disorder in a field beaten bare of grass. Bagshot Row\par
was a yawning sand and gravel quarry. Bag End up. beyond could not be seen for\par
a clutter of large huts.\par
'They've cut it down!' cried Sam. 'They've cut down the Party Tree!' He\par
pointed to where the tree. had stood under which Bilbo had made his Farewell\par
Speech. It was lying lopped and dead in the field. As if this was the last\par
straw Sam burst into tears.\par
A laugh put an end to them. There was a surly hobbit lounging over the\par
low wall of the mill-yard. He was grimy-faced and black-handed. 'Don't 'ee\par
like it, Sam?' he sneered. 'But you always was soft. I thought you'd gone off\par
in one o' them ships you used to prattle about, sailing, sailing. What d'you\par
want to come back for? We've work to do in the Shire now.'\par
'So I see,' said Sam. 'No time for washing, but time for wall-propping.\par
But see here, Master Sandyman, I've a score to pay in this village, and don't\par
you make it any longer with your jeering, or you'll foot a bill too big for\par
your purse.'\par
Ted Sandyman spat over the wall: 'Garn!' he said. 'You can't touch me.\par
I'm a friend o' the Boss's. But he'll touch you all right, if I have any more\par
of your mouth.'\par
'Don't waste any more words on the fool, Sam!' said Frodo. 'I hope there\par
are not many more hobbits that have become like this. It would be a worse\par
trouble than all the damage the Men have done.'\par
'You are dirty and insolent, Sandyman,' said Merry. 'And also very much\par
out of your reckoning. We are just going up the Hill to remove your precious\par
Boss. We have dealt with his Men.'\par
Ted gaped, for at that moment he first caught sight of the escort that at\par
a sign from Merry now marched over the bridge. Dashing back into the mill he\par
ran out with a horn and blew it loudly.\par
'Save your breath!' laughed Merry. 'I've a better.' Then lifting up his\par
silver horn he winded it, and its clear call rang over the Hill; and out of\par
the holes and sheds and shabby houses of Hobbiton the hobbits answered, and\par
came pouring out, and with cheers and loud cries they followed the company up\par
the road to Bag End.\par
At the top of the lane the party halted, and Frodo and his friends went\par
on; and they came at last to the once beloved place. The garden was full of\par
huts and sheds, some so near the old westward windows that they cut off all\par
their light. There were piles of refuse everywhere. The door was scarred; the\par
bell-chain was dangling loose, and the bell would not ring. Knocking brought\par
no answer. At length they pushed and the door yielded. They went in. The place\par
stank and was full of filth and disorder: it did not appear to have been used\par
for some time.\par
'Where is that miserable Lotho hiding?' said Merry. They had searched\par
every room and found no living thing save rats and mice. 'Shall we turn on the\par
others to search the sheds?'\par
'This is worse than Mordor!' said Sam. 'Much worse in a way. It comes\par
home to you, as they say; because it is home, and you remember it before it\par
was all ruined.'\par
'Yes, this is Mordor,' said Frodo. 'Just one of its works. Saruman was\par
doing its work all the time, even when he thought he was working for himself.\par
And the same with those that Saruman tricked, like Lotho.'\par
Merry looked round in dismay and disgust. 'Let's get out!' he said. 'If I\par
had known all the mischief he had caused, I should have stuffed my pouch down\par
Saruman's throat.'\par
'No doubt, no doubt! But you did not, and so I am able to welcome you\par
home.' There standing at the door was Saruman himself, looking well-fed and\par
well-pleased; his eyes gleamed with malice and amusement.\par
A sudden light broke on Frodo. 'Sharkey!' he cried.\par
Saruman laughed. 'So you have heard the name, have you? All my people\par
used to call me that in Isengard, I believe. A sign of affection, possibly.\par
But evidently you did not expect to see me here.'\par
'I did not,' said Frodo. 'But I might have guessed. A little mischief in\par
a mean way: Gandalf warned me that you were still capable of it.\par
'Quite capable,' said Saruman, 'and more than a little. You made me\par
laugh, you hobbit-lordlings, riding along with all those great people so\par
secure and so pleased with your little selves. You thought you had done very\par
well out of it all, and could now just amble back and have a nice quiet time\par
in the country. Saruman's home could be all wrecked, and he could be turned\par
out, but no one could touch yours. Oh no! Gandalf would look after your\par
affairs.'\par
Saruman laughed again. 'Not he! When his tools have done their task he\par
drops them. But you must go dangling after him, dawdling and talking, and\par
riding round twice as far as you needed. "Well," thought I, "if they're such\par
fools, I will get ahead of them and teach them a lesson. One ill turn deserves\par
another." It would have been a sharper lesson, if only you had given me a\par
little more time and more Men. Still I have already done much that you will\par
find it hard to mend or undo in your lives. And it will be pleasant to think\par
of that and set it against my injuries.'\par
'Well, if that is what you find pleasure in,' said Frodo, 'I pity you. It\par
will be a pleasure of memory only, I fear. Go at once and never return!'\par
The hobbits of the villages had seen Saruman come out of one of the huts,\par
and at once they came crowding up to the door of Bag End. When they heard\par
Frodo's command, they murmured angrily:\par
'Don't let him go! Kill him! He's a villain and a murderer. Kill him!'\par
Saruman looked round at their hostile faces and smiled. 'Kill him!' he\par
mocked. 'Kill him, if you think there are enough of you, my brave hobbits!' He\par
drew himself up and stared at them darkly with his black eyes. 'But do not\par
think that when I lost all my goods I lost all my power! Whoever strikes me\par
shall be accursed. And if my blood stains the Shire, it shall wither and never\par
again be healed.'\par
The hobbits recoiled. But Frodo said: 'Do not believe him! He has lost\par
all power, save his voice that can still daunt you and deceive you, if you let\par
it. But I will not have him slain. It is useless to meet revenge with revenge:\par
it will heal nothing. Go, Saruman, by the speediest way!'\par
'Worm! Worm!' Saruman called; and out of a nearby hut came Wormtongue,\par
crawling, almost like a dog. To the road again, Worm!' said Saruman. 'These\par
fine fellows and lordlings are turning us adrift again. Come along!'\par
Saruman turned to go, and Wormtongue shuffled after him. But even as\par
Saruman passed close to Frodo a knife flashed in his hand, and he stabbed\par
swiftly. The blade turned on the hidden mail-coat and snapped. A dozen\par
hobbits, led by Sam, leaped forward with a cry and flung the villain to the\par
ground. Sam drew his sword.\par
'No, Sam!' said Frodo. 'Do not kill him even now. For he has not hurt me.\par
And in any case I do not wish him to be slain in this evil mood. He was great\par
once, of a noble kind that we should not dare to raise our hands against. He\par
is fallen, and his cure is beyond us; but I would still spare him, in the hope\par
that he may find it.'\par
Saruman rose to his feet, and stared at Frodo. There was a strange look\par
in his eyes of mingled wonder and respect and hatred. 'You have grown,\par
Halfling,' he said. 'Yes, you have grown very much. You are wise, and cruel.\par
You have robbed my revenge of sweetness, and now I must go hence in\par
bitterness, in debt to your mercy. I hate it and you! Well, I go and I will\par
trouble you no more. But do not expect me to wish you health and long life.\par
You will have neither. But that is not my doing. I merely foretell.'\par
He walked away, and the hobbits made a lane for him to pass; but their\par
knuckles whitened as they gripped on their weapons. Wormtongue hesitated, and\par
then followed his master.\par
'Wormtongue!' called Frodo. 'You need not follow him. I know of no evil\par
you have done to me. You can have rest and food here for a while, until you\par
are stronger and can go your own ways.'\par
Wormtongue halted and looked back at him, half prepared to stay. Saruman\par
turned. 'No evil?' he cackled. 'Oh no! Even when he sneaks out at night it is\par
only to look at the stars. But did I hear someone ask where poor Lotho is\par
hiding? You know, don't you, Worm? Will you tell them?'\par
Wormtongue cowered down and whimpered: 'No, no!'\par
'Then I will,' said Saruman. 'Worm killed your Chief, poor little fellow,\par
your nice little Boss. Didn't you, Worm? Stabbed him in his sleep, I believe.\par
Buried him, I hope; though Worm has been very hungry lately. No, Worm is not\par
really nice. You had better leave him to me.'\par
A look of wild hatred came into Wormtongue's red eyes. 'You told me to;\par
you made me do it,' he hissed.\par
Saruman laughed. 'You do what Sharkey says, always, don't you, Worm?\par
Well, now he says: follow!' He kicked Wormtongue in the face as he grovelled,\par
and turned and made off. But at that something snapped: suddenly Wormtongue\par
rose up, drawing a hidden knife, and then with a snarl like a dog he sprang on\par
Saruman's back, jerked his head back, cut his throat, and with a yell ran off\par
down the lane. Before Frodo could recover or speak a word, three hobbit-bows\par
twanged and Wormtongue fell dead.\par
To the dismay of those that stood by, about the body of Saruman a grey\par
mist gathered, and rising slowly to a great height like smoke from a fire, as\par
a pale shrouded figure it loomed over the Hill. For a moment it wavered,\par
looking to the West; but out of the West came a cold wind, and it bent away,\par
and with a sigh dissolved into nothing.\par
Frodo looked down at the body with pity and horror, for as he looked it\par
seemed that long years of death were suddenly revealed in it, and it shrank,\par
and the shrivelled face became rags of skin upon a hideous skull. Lifting up\par
the skirt of the dirty cloak that sprawled beside it, he covered it over, and\par
turned away.\par
'And that's the end of that,' said Sam. 'A nasty end, and I wish I\par
needn't have seen it; but it's a good riddance.'\par
'And the very last end of the War, I hope,' said Merry.\par
'I hope so,' said Frodo and sighed. 'The very last stroke. But to think\par
that it should fall here, at the very door of Bag End! Among all my hopes and\par
fears at least I never expected that.'\par
'I shan't call it the end, till we've cleared up the mess,' said Sam\par
gloomily. 'And that'll take a lot of time and work.'\par
_Chapter 9_\par
The Grey Havens\par
The clearing up certainly needed a lot of work, but it took less time\par
than Sam had feared. The day after the battle Frodo rode to Michel Delving and\par
released the prisoners from the Lockholes. One of the first that they found\par
was poor Fredegar Bolger, Fatty no longer. He had been taken when the ruffians\par
smoked out a band of rebels that he led from their hidings up in the\par
Brockenbores by the hills of Scary.\par
'You would have done better to come with us after all, poor old\par
Fredegar!' said Pippin, as they carried him out too weak to walk.\par
He opened an eye and tried gallantly to smile. 'Who's this young giant\par
with the loud voice?' he whispered. 'Not little Pippin! What's your size in\par
hats now?'\par
Then there was Lobelia. Poor thing, she looked very old and thin when\par
they rescued her from a dark and narrow cell. She insisted on hobbling out on\par
her own feet; and she had such a welcome, and there was such clapping and\par
cheering when she appeared, leaning on Frodo's arm but still clutching her\par
umbrella, that she was quite touched, and drove away in tears. She had never\par
in her life been popular before. But she was crushed by the news of Lotho's\par
murder, and she would' not return to Bag End. She gave it back to Frodo, and\par
went to her own people, the Bracegirdles of Hardbottle.\par
When the poor creature died next Spring-she was after all more than a\par
hundred years old \endash  Frodo was surprised and much moved: she had left all that\par
remained of her money and of Lotho's for him to use in helping hobbits made\par
homeless by the troubles. So that feud was ended.\par
Old Will Whitfoot had been in the Lockholes longer than any, and though\par
he had perhaps been treated less harshly than some, he needed a lot of feeding\par
up before he could look the part of Mayor; so Frodo agreed to act as his\par
Deputy, until Mr. Whitfoot was in shape again. The only thing that he did as\par
Deputy Mayor was to reduce the Shirriffs to their proper functions and\par
numbers. The task of hunting out the last remnant of the ruffians was left to\par
Merry and Pippin, and it was soon done. The southern gangs, after hearing the\par
news of the Battle of Bywater, fled out of the land and offered little\par
resistance to the Thain. Before the Year's End the few survivors were rounded\par
up in the woods, and those that surrendered were shown to the borders.\par
Meanwhile the labour of repair went on apace, and Sam was kept very busy.\par
Hobbits can work like bees when the mood and the need comes on them. Now there\par
were thousands of willing hands of all ages, from the small but nimble ones of\par
the hobbit lads and lasses to the well-worn and horny ones of the gaffers and\par
gammers. Before Yule not a brick was left standing of the new Shirriff-houses\par
or of anything that had been built by 'Sharkey's Men'; but the bricks were\par
used to repair many an old hole, to make it snugger and drier. Great stores of\par
goods and food, and beer, were found that had been hidden away by the ruffians\par
in sheds and barns and deserted holes, and especially in the tunnels at Michel\par
Delving and in the old quarries at Scary; so that there was a great deal\par
better cheer that Yule than anyone had hoped for.\par
One of the first things done in Hobbiton, before even the removal of the\par
new mill, was the clearing of the Hill and Bag End, and the restoration of\par
Bagshot Row. The front of the new sand-pit was all levelled and made into a\par
large sheltered garden, and new holes were dug in the southward face, back\par
into the Hill, and they were lined with brick. The Gaffer was restored to\par
Number Three; and he said often and did not care who heard it:\par
'It's an ill wind as blows nobody no good, as I always say. And All's\par
well as ends Better!'\par
There was some discussion of the name that the new row should be given.\par
_Battle Gardens_ was thought of, or _Better Smials_. But after a while in\par
sensible hobbit-fashion it was just called _New Row_. It was a purely Bywater\par
joke to refer to it as Sharkey's End.\par
The trees were the worst loss and damage, for at Sharkey's bidding they\par
had been cut down recklessly far and wide over the Shire; and Sam grieved over\par
this more than anything else. For one thing, this hurt would take long to\par
heal, and only his great-grandchildren, he thought, would see the Shire as it\par
ought to be.\par
Then suddenly one day, for he had been too busy for weeks to give a\par
thought to his adventures, he remembered the gift of Galadriel. He brought the\par
box out and showed it to the other Travellers (for so they were now called by\par
everyone), and asked their advice.\par
'I wondered when you would think of it,' said Frodo. 'Open it!'\par
Inside it was filled with a grey dust, soft and fine, in the middle of\par
which was a seed, like a small nut with a silver shale. 'What can I do with\par
this?' said Sam.\par
'Throw it in the air on a breezy day and let it do its work!' said\par
Pippin.\par
'On what?' said Sam.\par
'Choose one spot as a nursery, and see what happens to the plants\par
there,' said Merry.\par
'But I'm sure the Lady would not like me to keep it all for my own\par
garden, now so many folk have suffered,' said Sam.\par
'Use all the wits and knowledge you have of your own, Sam,' said Frodo,\par
'and then use the gift to help your work and better it. And use it sparingly.\par
There is not much here, and I expect every grain has a value.'\par
So Sam planted saplings in all the places where specially beautiful or\par
beloved trees had been destroyed, and he put a grain of the precious dust in\par
the soil at the root of each. He went up and down the Shire in this labour;\par
but if he paid special attention to Hobbiton and Bywater no one blamed him.\par
And at the end he found that he still had a little of the dust left; so he\par
went to the Three-Farthing Stone, which is as near the centre of the Shire as\par
no matter, and cast it in the air with his blessing. The little silver nut he\par
planted in the Party Field where the tree had once been; and he wondered what\par
would come of it. All through the winter he remained as patient as he could,\par
and tried to restrain himself from going round constantly to see if anything\par
was happening.\par
Spring surpassed his wildest hopes. His trees began to sprout and grow,\par
as if time was in a hurry and wished to make one year do for twenty. In the\par
Party Field a beautiful young sapling leaped up: it had silver bark and long\par
leaves and burst into golden flowers in April. It was indeed a _mallorn_, and\par
it was the wonder of the neighbourhood. In after years, as it grew in grace\par
and beauty, it was known far and wide and people would come long journeys to\par
see it: the only _mallorn_ west of the Mountains and east of the Sea, and one\par
of the finest in the world.\par
Altogether 1420 in the Shire was a marvellous year. Not only was there\par
wonderful sunshine and delicious rain, in due times and perfect measure, but\par
there seemed something more: an air of richness and growth, and a gleam of a\par
beauty beyond that of mortal summers that flicker and pass upon this Middleearth.\par
All the children born or begotten in that year, and there were many,\par
were fair to see and strong, and most of them had a rich golden hair that had\par
before been rare among hobbits. The fruit was so plentiful that young hobbits\par
very nearly bathed in strawberries and cream; and later they sat on the lawns\par
under the plum-trees and ate, until they had made piles of stones like small\par
pyramids or the heaped skulls of a conqueror, and then they moved on. And no\par
one was ill, and everyone was pleased. except those who had to mow the grass.\par
In the Southfarthing the vines were laden, and the yield of 'leaf' was\par
astonishing; and everywhere there was so much corn that at Harvest every barn\par
was stuffed. 'The Northfarthing barley was so fine that the beer of 1420 malt\par
was long remembered and became a byword. Indeed a generation later one might\par
hear an old gaffer in an inn, after a good pint of well-earned ale, put down\par
his mug with a sigh: 'Ah! that was proper fourteen-twenty, that was!'\par
Sam stayed at first at the Cottons' with Frodo; but when the New Row was\par
ready he went with the Gaffer. In addition to all his other labours he was\par
busy directing the cleaning up and restoring of Bag End; but he was often away\par
in the Shire on his forestry work. So he was not at home in early March and\par
did not know that Frodo had been ill. On the thirteenth of that month Farmer\par
Cotton found Frodo lying on his bed; he was clutching a white gem that hung on\par
a chain about his neck and he seemed half in a dream.\par
'It is gone for ever,' he said, 'and now all is dark and empty.'\par
But the fit passed, and when Sam got back on the twenty-fifth, Frodo had\par
recovered, and he said nothing about himself. In the meanwhile Bag End had\par
been set in order, and Merry and Pippin came over from Crickhollow bringing\par
back all the old furniture and gear, so that the old hole soon looked very\par
much as it always had done.\par
When all was at last ready Frodo said: 'When are you going to move in and\par
join me, Sam?'\par
Sam looked a bit awkward.\par
'There is no need to come yet, if you don't want to,' said Frodo. 'But\par
you know the Gaffer is close at hand, and he will be very well looked after by\par
Widow Rumble.'\par
It's not that, Mr. Frodo, said Sam, and he went very red.\par
'Well, what is it?'\par
'It's Rosie, Rose Cotton,' said Sam. 'It seems she didn't like my going\par
abroad at all, poor lass; but as I hadn't spoken, she couldn't say so. And I\par
didn't speak, because I had a job to do first. But now I have spoken, and she\par
says: "Well, you've wasted a year, so why wait longer?" "Wasted?" I says. "I\par
wouldn't call it that." Still I see what she means. I feel torn in two, as you\par
might say.'\par
'I see,' said Frodo: 'you want to get married, and yet you want to live\par
with me in Bag End too? But my dear Sam, how easy! Get married as soon as you\par
can, and then move in with Rosie. There's room enough in Bag End for as big a\par
family as you could wish for.'\par
And so it was settled. Sam Gamgee married Rose Cotton in the Spring of\par
1420 (which was also famous for its weddings), and they came and lived at Bag\par
End. And if Sam thought himself lucky, Frodo knew that he was more lucky\par
himself; for there was not a hobbit in the Shire that was looked after with\par
such care. When the labours of repair had all been planned and set going he\par
took to a quiet life, writing a great deal and going through all his notes. He\par
resigned the office of Deputy Mayor at the Free Fair that mid-summer, and dear\par
old Will Whitfoot had another seven years of presiding at Banquets.\par
Merry and Pippin lived together for some time at Crickhollow, and there\par
was much coming and going between Buckland and Bag End. The two young\par
Travellers cut a great dash in the Shire with their songs and their tales and\par
their finery, and their wonderful parties. 'Lordly' folk called them, meaning\par
nothing but good; for it warmed all hearts to see them go riding by with their\par
mail-shirts so bright and their shields so splendid, laughing and singing\par
songs of far away; and if they were now large and magnificent, they were\par
unchanged otherwise, unless they were indeed more fairspoken and more jovial\par
and full of merriment than ever before.\par
Frodo and Sam, however, went back to ordinary attire, except that when\par
there was need they both wore long grey cloaks, finely woven and clasped at\par
the throat with beautiful brooches; and Mr. Frodo wore always a white jewel on\par
a chain that he often would finger.\par
All things now went well, with hope always of becoming still better; and\par
Sam was as busy and as full of delight as even a hobbit could wish. Nothing\par
for him marred that whole year, except for some vague anxiety about his\par
master. Frodo dropped quietly out of all the doings of the Shire, and Sam was\par
pained to notice how little honour he had in his own country. Few people knew\par
or wanted to know about his deeds and adventures; their admiration and respect\par
were given mostly to Mr. Meriadoc and Mr. Peregrin and (if Sam had known it)\par
to himself. Also in the autumn there appeared a shadow of old troubles.\par
One evening Sam came into the study and found his master looking very\par
strange. He was very pale and his eyes seemed to see things far away.\par
'What's the matter, Mr. Frodo?' said Sam.\par
'I am wounded,' he answered, 'wounded; it will never really heal.'\par
But then he got up, and the turn seemed to pass, and he was quite himself\par
the next day. It was not until afterwards that Sam recalled that the date was\par
October the sixth. Two years before on that day it was dark in the dell under\par
Weathertop.\par
Time went on, and 1421 came in. Frodo was ill again in March, but with a\par
great effort he concealed it, for Sam had other things to think about. The\par
first of Sam and Rosie's children was born on the twenty-fifth of March, a\par
date that Sam noted.\par
'Well, Mr. Frodo,' he said. 'I'm in a bit of a fix. Rose and me had\par
settled to call him Frodo, with your leave; but it's not _him_, it's _her_.\par
Though as pretty a maidchild as any one could hope for, taking after Rose more\par
than me, luckily. So we don't know what to do.'\par
'Well, Sam,' said Frodo, 'what's wrong with the old customs? Choose a\par
flower name like Rose. Half the maidchildren in the Shire are called by such\par
names, and what could be better?'\par
'I suppose you're right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'I've heard some beautiful\par
names on my travels, but I suppose they're a bit too grand for daily wear and\par
tear, as you might say. The Gaffer, he says: "Make it short, and then you\par
won't have to cut it short before you can use it." But if it's to be a flowername,\par
then I don't trouble about the length: it must be a beautiful flower,\par
because, you see, I think she is very beautiful, and is going to be\par
beautifuller still.'\par
Frodo thought for a moment. 'Well, Sam, what about _elanor_, the sunstar,\par
you remember the little golden flower in the grass of Lothl\'f3rien?'\par
'You're right again, Mr. Frodo!' said Sam delighted. 'That's what I\par
wanted.'\par
Little Elanor was nearly six months old, and 1421 had passed to its\par
autumn, when Frodo called Sam into the study.\par
'It will be Bilbo's Birthday on Thursday, Sam,' he said. 'And he will\par
pass the Old Took. He will be a hundred and thirty-one!'\par
'So he will!' said Sam. 'He's a marvel!'\par
'Well, Sam,' said Frodo. 'I want you to see Rose and find out if she can\par
spare you, so that you and I can go off together. You can't go far or for a\par
long time now, of course,' he said a little wistfully.\par
'Well, not very well, Mr. Frodo.'\par
'Of course not. But never mind. You can see me on my way. Tell Rose that\par
you won't be away very long, not more than a fortnight; and you'll come back\par
quite safe.'\par
'I wish I could go all the way with you to Rivendell, Mr. Frodo, and see\par
Mr. Bilbo,' said Sam. 'And yet the only place I really want to be in is here.\par
I am that torn in two.'\par
'Poor Sam! It will feel like that, I am afraid,' said Frodo. 'But you\par
will be healed. You were meant to be solid and whole, and you will be.'\par
In the next day or two Frodo went through his papers and his writings\par
with Sam, and he handed over his keys. There was a big book with plain red\par
leather covers; its tall pages were now almost filled. At the beginning there\par
were many leaves covered with Bilbo's thin wandering hand; but most of it was\par
written in Frodo's firm flowing script. It was divided into chapters but\par
Chapter 80 was unfinished, and after that were some blank leaves. The title\par
page had many titles on it, crossed out one after another, so:\par
_My Diary. My Unexpected Journey. There and Back Again. And What Happened\par
After._\par
_Adventures of Five Hobbits. The Tale of the Great Ring, compiled by Bilbo\par
Baggins from his own observations and the accounts of his friends. What we did\par
in the War of the Ring._\par
Here Bilbo's hand ended and Frodo had written:\par
THE DOWNFALL\par
OF THE\par
LORD OF THE RINGS\par
AND THE\par
RETURN OF THE KING\par
(as seen by the Little People; being the memoirs of Bilbo and Frodo of the\par
Shire, supplemented by the accounts of their friends and the learning of the\par
Wise.)\par
Together with extracts from Books of Lore translated by Bilbo in\par
Rivendell.\par
'Why, you have nearly finished it, Mr. Frodo!' Sam exclaimed. 'Well, you\par
have kept at it, I must say.'\par
'I have quite finished, Sam,' said Frodo. 'The last pages are for you.'\par
On September the twenty-first they set out together, Frodo on the pony\par
that had borne him all the way from Minas Tirith, and was now called Strider;\par
and Sam on his beloved Bill. It was a fair golden morning, and Sam did not ask\par
where they were going: he thought he could guess.\par
They took the Stock Road over the hills and went towards the Woody End,\par
and they let their ponies walk at their leisure. They camped in the Green\par
Hills, and on September the twenty-second they rode gently down into the\par
beginning of the trees as afternoon was wearing away.\par
'If that isn't the very tree you hid behind when the Black Rider first\par
showed up, Mr. Frodo!' said Sam pointing to the left. 'It seems like a dream\par
now.'\par
It was evening, and the stars were glimmering in the eastern sky as they\par
passed the ruined oak and turned and went on down the hill between the hazelthickets.\par
Sam was silent, deep in his memories. Presently he became aware that\par
Frodo was singing softly to himself, singing the old walking-song, but the\par
words were not quite the same.\par
_Still round the corner there may wait\par
A new road or a secret gate;\par
And though I oft have passed them by,\par
A day will come at last when I\par
Shall take the hidden paths that run\par
West of the Moon, East of the Sun._\par
And as if in answer, from down below, coming up the road out of the\par
valley, voices sang:\par
_A! Elbereth Gilthoniel!\par
silivren penna m\'edriel\par
o menel aglar elenath,\par
Gilthoniel, A! Elbereth!\par
We still remember, we who dwell\par
In this far land beneath the trees\par
The starlight on the Western Seas._\par
Frodo and Sam halted and sat silent in the soft shadows, until they saw a\par
shimmer as the travellers came towards them.\par
There was Gildor and many fair Elven folk; and there to Sam's wonder rode\par
Elrond and Galadriel. Elrond wore a mantle of grey and had a star upon his\par
forehead, and a silver harp was in his hand, and upon his finger was a ring of\par
gold with a great blue stone, Vilya, mightiest of the Three. But Galadriel sat\par
upon a white palfrey and was robed all in glimmering white, like clouds about\par
the Moon; for she herself seemed to shine with a soft light. On her finger was\par
Nenya, the ring wrought of _mithril_, that bore a single white stone\par
flickering like a frosty star. Riding slowly behind on a small grey pony, and\par
seeming to nod in his sleep, was Bilbo himself.\par
Elrond greeted them gravely and graciously, and Galadriel smiled upon\par
them. 'Well, Master Samwise,' she said. 'I hear and see that you have used my\par
gift well. The Shire shall now be more than ever blessed and beloved.' Sam\par
bowed, but found nothing to say. He had forgotten how beautiful the Lady was.\par
Then Bilbo woke up and opened his eyes. 'Hullo, Frodo!' he said. 'Well, I\par
have passed the Old Took today! So that's settled. And now I think I am quite\par
ready to go on another journey. Are you coming?'\par
'Yes, I am coming,' said Frodo. 'The Ring-bearers should go together.'\par
'Where are you going, Master?' cried Sam, though at last he understood\par
what was happening.\par
'To the Havens, Sam,' said Frodo.\par
'And I can't come.'\par
'No, Sam. Not yet anyway, not further than the Havens. Though you too\par
were a Ring-bearer, if only for a little while. Your time may come. Do not be\par
too sad, Sam. You cannot be always torn in two. You will have to be one and\par
whole, for many years. You have so much to enjoy and to be, and to do.'\par
'But,' said Sam, and tears started in his eyes, 'I thought you were going\par
to enjoy the Shire, too. for years and years, after all you have done.'\par
'So I thought too, once. But I have been too deeply hurt, Sam. I tried to\par
save the Shire, and it has been saved, but not for me. It must often be so,\par
Sam, when things are in danger: some one has to give them up, lose them, so\par
that others may keep them. But you are my heir: all that I had and might have\par
had I leave to you. And also you have Rose, and Elanor; and Frodo-lad will\par
come, and Rosie-lass, and Merry, and Goldilocks, and Pippin; and perhaps more\par
that I cannot see. Your hands and your wits will be needed everywhere. You\par
will be the Mayor, of course, as long as you want to be, and the most famous\par
gardener in history; and you will read things out of the Red Book, and keep\par
alive the memory of the age that is gone. so that people will remember the\par
Great Danger and so love their beloved land all the more. And that will keep\par
you as busy and as happy as anyone can be, as long as your part of the Story\par
goes on.\par
'Come now, ride with me!'\par
Then Elrond and Galadriel rode on; for the Third Age was over, and the\par
Days of the Rings were passed, and an end was come of the story and song of\par
those times. With them went many Elves of the High Kindred who would no longer\par
stay in Middle-earth; and among them, filled with a sadness that was yet\par
blessed and without bitterness, rode Sam, and Frodo, and Bilbo, and the Elves\par
delighted to honour them.\par
Though they rode through the midst of the Shire all the evening and all\par
the night, none saw them pass, save the wild creatures; or here and there some\par
wanderer in the dark who saw a swift shimmer under the trees, or a light and\par
shadow flowing through the grass as the Moon went westward. And when they had\par
passed from the Shire, going about the south skirts of the White Downs, they\par
came to the Far Downs, and to the Towers, and looked on the distant Sea; and\par
so they rode down at last to Mithlond, to the Grey Havens in the long firth of\par
Lune.\par
As they came to the gates C\'edrdan the Shipwright came forth to greet them.\par
Very tall he was, and his beard was long, and he was grey and old, save that\par
his eyes were keen as stars; and he looked at them and bowed, and said: 'All\par
is now ready.'\par
Then C\'edrdan led them to the Havens, and there was a white ship lying, and\par
upon the quay beside a great grey horse stood a figure robed all in white\par
awaiting them. As he turned and came towards them Frodo saw that Gandalf now\par
wore openly upon his hand the Third Ring, Narya the Great, and the stone upon\par
it was red as fire. Then those who were to go were glad, for they knew that\par
Gandalf also would take ship with them.\par
But Sam was now sorrowful at heart, and it seemed to him that if the\par
parting would be bitter, more grievous still would be the long road home\par
alone. But even as they stood there, and the Elves were going aboard, and all\par
was being made ready to depart, up rode Merry and Pippin in great haste. And\par
amid his tears Pippin laughed.\par
'You tried to give us the slip once before and failed, Frodo.' he said.\par
'This time you have nearly succeeded, but you have failed again. It was not\par
Sam, though, that gave you away this time, but Gandalf himself!'\par
'Yes,' said Gandalf; 'for it will be better to ride back three together\par
'than one alone. Well, here at last, dear friends, on the shores of the Sea\par
comes the end of our fellowship in Middle-earth. Go in peace! I will not say:\par
do not weep; for not all tears are an evil.'\par
Then Frodo kissed Merry and Pippin, and last of all Sam, and went aboard;\par
and the sails were drawn up, and the wind blew, and slowly the ship slipped\par
away down the long grey firth; and the light of the glass of Galadriel that\par
Frodo bore glimmered and was lost. And the ship went out into the High Sea and\par
passed on into the West, until at last on a night of rain Frodo smelled a\par
sweet fragrance on the air and heard the sound of singing that came over the\par
water. And then it seemed to him that as in his dream in the house of\par
Bombadil, the grey rain-curtain turned all to silver glass and was rolled\par
back, and he beheld white shores and beyond them a far green country under a\par
swift sunrise.\par
But to Sam the evening deepened to darkness as he stood at the Haven; and\par
as he looked at the grey sea he saw only a shadow on the waters that was soon\par
lost in the West. There still he stood far into the night, hearing only the\par
sigh and murmur of the waves on the shores of Middle-earth, and the sound of\par
them sank deep into his heart. Beside him stood Merry and Pippin, and they\par
were silent.\par
At last the three companions turned away, and never again looking back\par
they rode slowly homewards; and they spoke no word to one another until they\par
came back to the Shire. but each had great comfort in his friends on the long\par
grey road.\par
At last they rode over the downs and took the East Road, and then Merry\par
and Pippin rode on to Buckland; and already they were singing again as they\par
went. But Sam turned to Bywater, and so came back up the Hill, as day was\par
ending once more. And he went on, and there was yellow light, and fire within;\par
and the evening meal was ready, and he was expected. And Rose drew him in, and\par
set him in his chair, and put little Elanor upon his lap.\par
He drew a deep breath. 'Well, I'm back,' he said.\par
}
 